CHAPTER 9

Inference Optimization

New models come and go, but one thing will always remain relevant: making them
better, cheaper, and faster. Up until now, the book has discussed various techniques
for making models better. This chapter focuses on making them faster and cheaper.
No matter how good your model is, if it’s too slow, your users might lose patience, or
worse, its predictions might become useless—imagine a next-day stock price predic‐
tion model that takes two days to compute each outcome. If your model is too expen‐
sive, its return on investment won’t be worth it.
Inference optimization can be done at the model, hardware, and service levels. At the
model level, you can reduce a trained model’s size or develop more efficient architec‐
tures, such as one without the computation bottlenecks in the attention mechanism
often used in transformer models. At the hardware level, you can design more power‐
ful hardware.
The inference service runs the model on the given hardware to accommodate user
requests. It can incorporate techniques that optimize models for specific hardware. It
also needs to consider usage and traffic patterns to efficiently allocate resources to
reduce latency and cost.
Because of this, inference optimization is an interdisciplinary field that often sees col‐
laboration among model researchers, application developers, system engineers, com‐
piler designers, hardware architects, and even data center operators.
This chapter discusses bottlenecks for AI inference and techniques to overcome
them. It’ll focus mostly on optimization at the model and service levels, with an over‐
view of AI accelerators.

405

This chapter also covers performance metrics and trade-offs. Sometimes, a technique
that speeds up a model can also reduce its cost. For example, reducing a model’s pre‐
cision makes it smaller and faster. But often, optimization requires trade-offs. For
example, the best hardware might make your model run faster but at a higher cost.
Given the growing availability of open source models, more teams are building their
own inference services. However, even if you don’t implement these inference opti‐
mization techniques, understanding these techniques will help you evaluate inference
services and frameworks. If your application’s latency and cost are hurting you, read
on. This chapter might help you diagnose the causes and potential solutions.

Understanding Inference Optimization
There are two distinct phases in an AI model’s lifecycle: training and inference.
Training refers to the process of building a model. Inference refers to the process of
using a model to compute an output for a given input.1 Unless you train or finetune a
model, you’ll mostly need to care about inference.2
This section starts with an overview of inference that introduces a shared vocabulary
to discuss the rest of the chapter. If you’re already familiar with these concepts, feel
free to skip to the section of interest.

Inference Overview
In production, the component that runs model inference is called an inference server.
It hosts the available models and has access to the necessary hardware. Based on
requests from applications (e.g., user prompts), it allocates resources to execute the
appropriate models and returns the responses to users. An inference server is part of
a broader inference service, which is also responsible for receiving, routing, and pos‐
sibly preprocessing requests before they reach the inference server. A visualization of
a simple inference service is shown in Figure 9-1.

1 As discussed in Chapter 7, inference involves the forward pass while training involves both the forward and

backward passes.

2 A friend, Mark Saroufim, pointed me to an interesting relationship between a model’s training cost and infer‐

ence cost. Imagine you’re a model provider. Let T be the total training cost, p be the cost you’re charging per
inference, and N be the number of inference calls you can sell. Developing a model only makes sense if the
money you can recover from inference for a model is more than its training cost, i.e., T <= p × N. The more a
model is used in production, the more model providers can reduce inference cost. However, this doesn’t
apply for third-party API providers who sell inference calls on top of open source models.

406

| Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

.

Figure 9-1. A simple inference service.
Model APIs like those provided by OpenAI and Google are inference services. If you
use one of these services, you won’t be implementing most of the techniques dis‐
cussed in this chapter. However, if you host a model yourself, you’ll be responsible
for building, optimizing, and maintaining its inference service.

Computational bottlenecks
Optimization is about identifying bottlenecks and addressing them. For example, to
optimize traffic, city planners might identify congestion points and take measures to
alleviate congestion. Similarly, an inference server should be designed to address the
computational bottlenecks of the inference workloads it serves. There are two main
computational bottlenecks, compute-bound and memory bandwidth-bound:
Compute-bound
This refers to tasks whose time-to-complete is determined by the computation
needed for the tasks. For example, password decryption is typically computebound due to the intensive mathematical calculations required to break encryp‐
tion algorithms.
Memory bandwidth-bound
These tasks are constrained by the data transfer rate within the system, such as
the speed of data movement between memory and processors. For example, if
you store your data in the CPU memory and train a model on GPUs, you have to
move data from the CPU to the GPU, which can take a long time. This can be

Understanding Inference Optimization

|

407

shortened as bandwidth-bound. In literature, memory bandwidth-bound is often
referred to as memory-bound.

Terminology Ambiguity: Memory-Bound Versus Bandwidth-Bound
Memory-bound is also used by some people to refer to tasks whose time-to-complete
is constrained by memory capacity instead of memory bandwidth. This occurs when
your hardware doesn’t have sufficient memory to handle the task, for example, if your
machine doesn’t have enough memory to store the entire internet. This memory is
often manifested in the error recognizable by engineers everywhere: OOM, out-ofmemory.3
However, this situation can often be mitigated by splitting your task into smaller
pieces. For example, if you’re constrained by GPU memory and cannot fit an entire
model into the GPU, you can split the model across GPU memory and CPU memory.
This splitting will slow down your computation because of the time it takes to trans‐
fer data between the CPU and GPU. However, if data transfer is fast enough, this
becomes less of an issue. Therefore, the memory capacity limitation is actually more
about memory bandwidth.

The concepts of compute-bound or memory bandwidth-bound were introduced in
the paper “Roofline” (Williams et al., 2009).4 Mathematically, an operation can be
classified as compute-bound or memory bandwidth-bound based on its arithmetic
intensity, which is the number of arithmetic operations per byte of memory access.
Profiling tools like NVIDIA Nsight will show you a roofline chart to tell you whether
your workload is compute-bound or memory bandwidth-bound, as shown in
Figure 9-2. This chart is a roofline chart because it resembles a roof. Roofline charts
are common in hardware performance analyses.
Different optimization techniques aim to mitigate different bottlenecks. For example,
a compute-bound workload might be sped up by spreading it out to more chips or by
leveraging chips with more computational power (e.g., a higher FLOP/s number). A
memory bandwidth-bound workload might be sped up by leveraging chips with
higher bandwidth.

3 Anecdotally, I find that people coming from a system background (e.g., optimization engineers and GPU

engineers) use memory-bound to refer to bandwidth-bound, and people coming from an AI background (e.g.,
ML and AI engineers) use to memory-bound to refer to memory capacity-bound.

4 The Roofline paper uses the term memory-bound to refer to memory-bandwidth bound.

408

| Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Figure 9-2. The roofline chart can help you visualize whether an operation is computebound or memory bandwidth-bound. This graph is on a log scale.
Different model architectures and workloads result in different computational bottle‐
necks. For example, inference for image generators like Stable Diffusion is typically
compute-bound, whereas inference for autoregression language models is typically
memory bandwidth-bound.
As an illustration, let’s look into language model inference. Recall from Chapter 2
that inference for a transformer-based language model consists of two steps, prefill‐
ing and decoding:
Prefill
The model processes the input tokens in parallel.5 How many tokens can be pro‐
cessed at once is limited by the number of operations your hardware can execute
in a given time. Therefore, prefilling is compute-bound.
Decode
The model generates one output token at a time. At a high level, this step typi‐
cally involves loading large matrices (e.g., model weights) into GPUs, which is
limited by how quickly your hardware can load data into memory. Decoding is,
therefore, memory bandwidth-bound.
Figure 9-3 visualizes prefilling and decoding.

5 Prefilling effectively populates the initial KV cache for the transformer model.

Understanding Inference Optimization

|

409

Figure 9-3. Autoregressive language models follow two steps for inference: prefill and
decode. <eos> denotes the end of the sequence token.
Because prefill and decode have different computational profiles, they are often
decoupled in production with separate machines. This technique will be discussed
“Inference Service Optimization” on page 440.
The factors that affect the amount of prefilling and decoding computation in an LLM
inference server, and therefore its bottlenecks, include context length, output length,
and request batching strategies. Long context typically results in a memory
bandwidth-bound workload, but clever optimization techniques, such as those dis‐
cussed later in this chapter, can remove this bottleneck.
As of this writing, due to the prevalence of the transformer architecture and the limi‐
tations of the existing accelerator technologies, many AI and data workloads are
memory bandwidth-bound. However, future software and hardware advancements
will be able to make AI and data workloads compute-bound.

Online and batch inference APIs
Many providers offer two types of inference APIs, online and batch:
• Online APIs optimize for latency. Requests are processed as soon as they arrive.
• Batch APIs optimize for cost. If your application doesn’t have strict latency
requirements, you can send them to batch APIs for more efficient processing.
Higher latency allows a broader range of optimization techniques, including
batching requests together and using cheaper hardware. For example, as of this
writing, both Google Gemini and OpenAI offer batch APIs at a 50% cost

410

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

reduction and significantly higher turnaround time, i.e., in the order of hours
instead of seconds or minutes.6
Online APIs might still batch requests together as long as it doesn’t significantly
impact latency, as discussed in “Batching” on page 440. The only real difference is that
an online API focuses on lower latency, whereas a batch API focuses on higher
throughput.
Customer-facing use cases, such as chatbots and code generation, typically require
lower latency, and, therefore, tend to use online APIs. Use cases with less stringent
latency requirements, which are ideal for batch APIs, include the following:
• Synthetic data generation
• Periodic reporting, such as summarizing Slack messages, sentiment analysis of
brand mentions on social media, and analyzing customer support tickets
• Onboarding new customers who require processing of all their uploaded
documents
• Migrating to a new model that requires reprocessing of all the data
• Generating personalized recommendations or newsletters for a large customer
base
• Knowledge base updates by reindexing an organization’s data
APIs usually return complete responses by default. However, with autoregressive
decoding, it can take a long time for a model to complete a response, and users are
impatient. Many online APIs offer streaming mode, which returns each token as it’s
generated. This reduces the time the users have to wait until the first token. The
downside of this approach is that you can’t score a response before showing it to
users, increasing the risk of users seeing bad responses. However, you can still retro‐
spectively update or remove a response as soon as the risk is detected.

6 If you run an inference service, separating your inference APIs into online and batch can help you prioritize

latency for requests where latency matters the most. Let’s say that your inference server can serve only a maxi‐
mum of X requests/second without latency degradation, you have to serve Y requests/second, and Y is larger
than X. In an ideal world, users with less-urgent requests can send their requests to the batch API, so that
your service can focus on processing the online API requests first.

Understanding Inference Optimization

|

411

A batch API for foundation models differs from batch inference for
traditional ML. In traditional ML:
• Online inference means that predictions are computed after
requests have arrived.
• Batch inference means that predictions are precomputed
before requests have arrived.
Precompution is possible for use cases with finite and predictable
inputs like recommendation systems, where recommendations can
be generated for all users in advance. These precomputed predic‐
tions are fetched when requests arrive, e.g., when a user visits the
website. However, with foundation model use cases where the
inputs are open-ended, it’s hard to predict all user prompts.7

Inference Performance Metrics
Before jumping into optimization, it’s important to understand what metrics to opti‐
mize for. From the user perspective, the central axis is latency (response quality is a
property of the model itself, not of the inference service). However, application devel‐
opers must also consider throughput and utilization as they determine the cost of
their applications.

Latency, TTFT, and TPOT
Latency measures the time from when users send a query until they receive the com‐
plete response. For autoregressive generation, especially in the streaming mode, the
overall latency can be broken into several metrics:
Time to first token
TTFT measures how quickly the first token is generated after users send a query.
It corresponds to the duration of the prefill step and depends on the input’s
length. Users might have different expectations for TTFT for different applica‐
tions. For example, for conversational chatbots, the TTFT should be instantane‐
ous.8 However, users might be willing to wait longer to summarize long
documents.

7 As discussed in “Prompt caching” on page 443, it’s common to know in advance the system prompt of an appli‐

cation. It’s just the exact user queries that are hard to predict.

8 In the early days of chatbots, some people complained about chatbots responding too fast, which seemed

unnatural. See “Lufthansa Delays Chatbot’s Responses to Make It More ‘Human’” (Ry Crozier, iTnews, May
2017). However, as people become more familiar with chatbots, this is no longer the case.

412

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Time per output token
TPOT measures how quickly each output token is generated after the first token.
If each token takes 100 ms, a response of 1,000 tokens will take 100 s.
In the streaming mode, where users read each token as it’s generated, TPOT
should be faster than human reading speed but doesn’t have to be much faster. A
very fast reader can read 120 ms/token, so a TPOT of around 120 ms, or 6–8
tokens/second, is sufficient for most use cases.
Time between tokens and inter-token latency
Variations of this metric include time between tokens (TBT) and inter-token
latency (ITL).9 Both measure the time between output tokens.
The total latency will equal TTFT + TPOT × (number of output tokens).
Two applications with the same total latency can offer different user experiences with
different TTFT and TPOT. Would your users prefer instant first tokens with a longer
wait between tokens, or would they rather wait slightly longer for the first tokens but
enjoy faster token generation afterward? User studies will be necessary to determine
the optimal user experience. Reducing TTFT at the cost of higher TPOT is possible
by shifting more compute instances from decoding to prefilling and vice versa.10
It’s important to note that the TTFT and TPOT values observed by users might differ
from those observed by models, especially in scenarios involving CoT (chain-ofthought) or agentic queries where models generate intermediate steps not shown to
users. Some teams use the metric time to publish to make it explicit that it measures
time to the first token users see.
Consider the scenario where, after a user sends a query, the model performs the fol‐
lowing steps:
1. Generate a plan, which consists of a sequence of actions. This plan isn’t shown to
the user.
2. Take actions and log their outputs. These outputs aren’t shown to the user.
3. Based on these outputs, generate a final response to show the user.

9 Time between tokens (TBT) is used by LinkedIn and inter-token latency (ITL) is used by NVIDIA.
10 An experiment by Anyscale shows that 100 input tokens have approximately the same impact on the overall

latency as a single output token.

Understanding Inference Optimization

|

413

From the model’s perspective, the first token is generated in step 1. This is when the
model internally begins its token generation process. The user, however, only sees the
first token of the final output generated in step 3. Thus, from their perspective, TTFT
is much longer.
Because latency is a distribution, the average can be misleading. Imagine you have 10
requests whose TTFT values are 100 ms, 102 ms, 100 ms, 100 ms, 99 ms, 104 ms, 110
ms, 90 ms, 3,000 ms, 95 ms. The average TTFT value is 390 ms, which makes your
inference service seem slower than it is. There might have been a network error that
slowed down one request or a particularly long prompt that took a much longer time
to prefill. Either way, you should investigate. With a large volume of requests, outliers
that skew the average latency are almost inevitable.
It’s more helpful to look at latency in percentiles, as they tell you something about a
certain percentage of your requests. The most common percentile is the 50th percen‐
tile, abbreviated as p50 (median). If the median is 100 ms, half of the requests take
longer than 100 ms to generate the first token, and half take less than 100 ms. Percen‐
tiles also help you discover outliers, which might be symptoms of something wrong.
Typically, the percentiles you’ll want to look at are p90, p95, and p99. It’s also helpful
to plot TTFT values against inputs’ lengths.

Throughput and goodput
Throughput measures the number of output tokens per second an inference service
can generate across all users and requests.
Some teams count both input and output tokens in throughput calculation. However,
since processing input tokens (prefilling) and generating output tokens (decoding)
have different computational bottlenecks and are often decoupled in modern infer‐
ence servers, input and output throughput should be counted separately. When
throughput is used without any modifier, it usually refers to output tokens.
Throughput is typically measured as tokens/s (TPS). If you serve multiple users,
tokens/s/user is also used to evaluate how the system scales with more users.
Throughput can also be measured as the number of completed requests during a
given time. Many applications use requests per second (RPS). However, for applica‐
tions built on top of foundation models, a request might take seconds to complete, so
many people use completed requests per minute (RPM) instead. Tracking this metric
is useful for understanding how an inference service handles concurrent requests.
Some providers might throttle your service if you send too many concurrent requests
at the same time.

414

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Throughput is directly linked to compute cost. A higher throughput typically means
lower cost. If your system costs $2/h in compute and its throughput is 100 tokens/s, it
costs around $5.556 per 1M output tokens. If each request generates 200 output
tokens on average, the cost for decoding 1K requests would be $1.11.
The prefill cost can be similarly calculated. If your hardware costs $2 per hour and it
can prefill 100 requests per minute, the cost for prefilling 1K requests would be $0.33.
The total cost per request is the sum of the prefilling and decoding costs. In this
example, the total cost for 1K requests would be $1.11 + $0.33 = $1.44.
What’s considered good throughput depends on the model, the hardware, and the
workload. Smaller models and higher-end chips typically result in higher throughput.
Workloads with consistent input and output lengths are easier to optimize than
workloads with variable lengths.
Even for similarly sized models, hardware, and workloads, direct throughput com‐
parisons might be only approximate because token count depends on what consti‐
tutes a token, and different models have different tokenizers. It’s better to compare
the efficiency of inference servers using metrics such as cost per request.
Just like most other software applications, AI applications have the latency/through‐
put trade-off. Techniques like batching can improve throughput but reduce latency.
According to the LinkedIn AI team in their reflection after a year of deploying gener‐
ative AI products (LinkedIn, 2024), it’s not uncommon to double or triple the
throughput if you’re willing to sacrifice TTFT and TPOT.
Due to this trade-off, focusing on an inference service based solely on its throughput
and cost can lead to a bad user experience. Instead, some teams focus on goodput, a
metric adapted from networking for LLM applications. Goodput measures the num‐
ber of requests per second that satisfies the SLO, software-level objective.
Imagine that your application has the following objectives: TTFT of at most 200 ms
and TPOT of at most 100 ms. Let’s say that your inference service can complete 100
requests per minute. However, out of these 100 requests, only 30 satisfy the SLO.
Then, the goodput of this service is 30 requests per minute. A visualization of this is
shown in Figure 9-4.

Understanding Inference Optimization

|

415

Figure 9-4. If an inference service can complete 10 RPS but only 3 satisfy the SLO, then
its goodput is 3 RPS.

Utilization, MFU, and MBU
Utilization metrics measure how efficiently a resource is being used. It typically
quantifies the proportion of the resource actively being used compared to its total
available capacity.
A common but often misunderstood metric is GPU utilization, and NVIDIA is parti‐
ally to blame for this misunderstanding. The official NVIDIA tool for monitoring
GPU usage is nvidia-smi—SMI stands for System Management Interface. One met‐
ric this tool shows is GPU utilization, which represents the percentage of time during
which the GPU is actively processing tasks. For example, if you run inference on a
GPU cluster for 10 hours, and the GPUs are actively processing tasks for 5 of those
hours, your GPU utilization would be 50%.
However, actively processing tasks doesn’t mean doing so efficiently. For simplicity,
consider a tiny GPU capable of doing 100 operations per second. In nvidia-smi’s
definition of utilization, this GPU can report 100% utilization even if it’s only doing
one operation per second.
If you pay for a machine that can do 100 operations and use it for only 1 operation,
you’re wasting money. nvidia-smi’s GPU optimization metric is, therefore, not very
useful. A utilization metric you might care about, out of all the operations a machine
is capable of computing, is how many it’s doing in a given time. This metric is called

416

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

MFU (Model FLOP/s Utilization), which distinguishes it from the NVIDIA GPU uti‐
lization metric.
MFU is the ratio of the observed throughput (tokens/s) relative to the theoretical
maximum throughput of a system operating at peak FLOP/s. If at the peak FLOP/s
advertised by the chip maker, the chip can generate 100 tokens/s, but when used for
your inference service, it can generate only 20 tokens/s, your MFU is 20%.11
Similarly, because memory bandwidth is expensive, you might also want to know
how efficiently your hardware’s bandwidth is utilized. MBU (Model Bandwidth Uti‐
lization) measures the percentage of achievable memory bandwidth used. If the chip’s
peak bandwidth is 1 TB/s and your inference uses only 500 GB/s, your MBU is 50%.
Computing the memory bandwidth being used for LLM inference is straightforward:
parameter count × bytes/param × tokens/s

MBU is computed as follows:
(parameter count × bytes/param × tokens/s) / (theoretical bandwidth)

For example, if you use a 7B-parameter model in FP16 (two bytes per parameter) and
achieve 100 tokens/s, the bandwidth used is:
7B × 2 × 100 = 700 GB/s

This underscores the importance of quantization (discussed in Chapter 7). Fewer
bytes per parameter mean your model consumes less valuable bandwidth.
If this is done on an A100-80GB GPU with a theoretical 2 TB/s of memory band‐
width, the MBU is:
(700 GB/s) / (2 TB/s) = 70%

The relationships between throughput (tokens/s) and MBU and between throughput
and MFU are linear, so some people might use throughput to refer to MBU and
MFU.
What’s considered a good MFU and MBU depends on the model, hardware, and
workload. Compute-bound workloads typically have higher MFU and lower MBU,
while bandwidth-bound workloads often show lower MFU and higher MBU.
Because training can benefit from more efficient optimization (e.g., better batching),
thanks to having more predictable workloads, MFU for training is typically higher
than MFU for inference. For inference, since prefill is compute-bound and decode is
memory bandwidth-bound, MFU during prefilling is typically higher than MFU dur‐
ing decoding. For model training, as of this writing, an MFU above 50% is generally
11 People have cared about FLOP/s utilization for a long time, but the term MFU was introduced in the PaLM

paper (Chowdhery et al., 2022).

Understanding Inference Optimization

|

417

considered good, but it can be hard to achieve on specific hardware.12 Table 9-1
shows MFU for several models and accelerators.
Table 9-1. MFU examples from “PaLM: Scaling Language Modeling with Pathways”
(Chowdhery et al., 2022).
Model
GPT-3
Gopher
Megatron-Turing NLG
PaLM

Number of parameters
(in billions)
175B
280B
530B
540B

Accelerator chips
V100
4096 TPU v3
2240 A100
6144 TPU v4

Model FLOP/s
utilization
21.3%
32.5%
30.2%
46.2%

Figure 9-5 shows the MBU for the inference process using Llama 2-70B in FP16 on
different hardware. The decline is likely due to the higher computational load per
second with more users, shifting the workload from being bandwidth-bound to
compute-bound.

Figure 9-5. Bandwidth utilization for Llama 2-70B in FP16 across three different chips
shows a decrease in MBU as the number of concurrent users increases. Image from
“LLM Training and Inference with Intel Gaudi 2 AI Accelerators” (Databricks, 2024).

12 Chip makers might also be doing what I call peak FLOP/s hacking. This might run experiments in certain

conditions, such as using sparse matrices with specific shapes, to increase their peak FLOP/s. Higher peak
FLOP/s numbers make their chips more attractive, but it can be harder for users to achieve high MFU.

418

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Utilization metrics are helpful to track your system’s efficiency. Higher utilization
rates for similar workloads on the same hardware generally mean that your services
are becoming more efficient. However, the goal isn’t to get the chips with the highest
utilization. What you really care about is how to get your jobs done faster and
cheaper. A higher utilization rate means nothing if the cost and latency both increase.

AI Accelerators
How fast and cheap software can run depends on the hardware it runs on. While
there are optimization techniques that work across hardware, understanding hard‐
ware allows for deeper optimization. This section looks at hardware from an infer‐
ence perspective, but it can be applied to training as well.
The development of AI models and hardware has always been intertwined. The lack
of sufficiently powerful computers was one of the contributing factors to the first AI
winter in the 1970s.13
The revival of interest in deep learning in 2012 was also closely tied to compute. One
commonly acknowledged reason for the popularity of AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) is that it was the first paper to successfully use GPUs, graphics processing units,
to train neural networks.14 Before GPUs, if you wanted to train a model at AlexNet’s
scale, you’d have to use thousands of CPUs, like the one Google released just a few
months before AlexNet. Compared to thousands of CPUs, a couple of GPUs were a
lot more accessible to PhD students and researchers, setting off the deep learning
research boom.

13 In the 1960s, computers could run only one-layer neural networks, which had very limited capabilities. In

their famous 1969 book Perceptrons: An Introduction to Computational Geometry (MIT Press), two AI pio‐
neers, Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert, argued that neural networks with hidden layers would still be
able to do little. Their exact quote was: “Virtually nothing is known about the computational capabilities of
this latter kind of machine. We believe that it can do little more than can a low order perceptron.” There
wasn’t sufficient compute power to dispute their argument, which was then cited by many people as a key
reason for the drying up of AI funding in the 1970s.

14 There have been discussions on whether to rename the GPU since it’s used for a lot more than graphics (Jon

Peddie, “Chasing Pixels,” July 2018). Jensen Huang, NVIDIA’s CEO, said in an interview (Stratechery, March
2022) that once the GPU took off and they added more capabilities to it, they considered renaming it to
something more general like GPGPU (general-purpose GPU) or XGU. They decided against renaming
because they assumed that people who buy GPUs will be smart enough to know what a GPU is good for
beyond its name.

Understanding Inference Optimization

|

419

What’s an accelerator?
An accelerator is a chip designed to accelerate a specific type of computational work‐
load. An AI accelerator is designed for AI workloads. The dominant type of AI accel‐
erator is GPUs, and the biggest economic driver during the AI boom in the early
2020s is undoubtedly NVIDIA.
The main difference between CPUs and GPUs is that CPUs are designed for generalpurpose usage, whereas GPUs are designed for parallel processing:
• CPUs have a few powerful cores, typically up to 64 cores for high-end consumer
machines. While many CPU cores can handle multi-threaded workloads effec‐
tively, they excel at tasks requiring high single-thread performance, such as run‐
ning an operating system, managing I/O (input/output) operations, or handling
complex, sequential processes.
• GPUs have thousands of smaller, less powerful cores optimized for tasks that can
be broken down into many smaller, independent calculations, such as graphics
rendering and machine learning. The operation that constitutes most ML work‐
loads is matrix multiplication, which is highly parallelizable.15
While the pursuit of efficient parallel processing increases computational capabilities,
it imposes challenges on memory design and power consumption.
The success of NVIDIA GPUs has inspired many accelerators designed to speed up
AI workloads, including Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)’s newer generations of
GPUs, Google’s TPU (Tensor Processing Unit), Intel’s Habana Gaudi, Graphcore’s
Intelligent Processing Unit (IPU), Groq’s Language Processing Unit (LPU), Cerebras’
Wafer-Scale Quant Processing Unit (QPU), and many more being introduced.
While many chips can handle both training and inference, one big theme emerging is
specialized chips for inference. A survey by Desislavov et al. (2023) shares that infer‐
ence can exceed the cost of training in commonly used systems, and that inference
accounts for up to 90% of the machine learning costs for deployed AI systems.

15 Matrix multiplication, affectionately known as matmul, is estimated to account for more than 90% of all float‐

ing point operations in a neural network, according to “Data Movement Is All You Need: A Case Study on
Optimizing Transformers” (Ivanov et al., arXiv, v3, November 2021) and “Scalable MatMul-free Language
Modeling” (Zhu et al., arXiv, June 2024).

420

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

As discussed in Chapter 7, training demands much more memory due to backpropa‐
gation and is generally more difficult to perform in lower precision. Furthermore,
training usually emphasizes throughput, whereas inference aims to minimize latency.
Consequently, chips designed for inference are often optimized for lower precision
and faster memory access, rather than large memory capacity. Examples of such
chips include the Apple Neural Engine, AWS Inferentia, and MTIA (Meta Training
and Inference Accelerator). Chips designed for edge computing, like Google’s Edge
TPU and the NVIDIA Jetson Xavier, are also typically geared toward inference.
There are also chips specialized for different model architectures, such as chips speci‐
alized for the transformer.16 Many chips are designed for data centers, with more and
more being designed for consumer devices (such as phones and laptops).
Different hardware architectures have different memory layouts and specialized com‐
pute units that evolve over time. These units are optimized for specific data types,
such as scalars, vectors, or tensors, as shown in Figure 9-6.

Figure 9-6. Different compute primitives. Image inspired by Chen et al. (2018).
A chip might have a mixture of different compute units optimized for various data
types. For example, GPUs traditionally supported vector operations, but many
modern GPUs now include tensor cores optimized for matrix and tensor computa‐
tions. TPUs, on the other hand, are designed with tensor operations as their primary
compute primitive. To efficiently operate a model on a hardware architecture, its
memory layout and compute primitives need to be taken into account.
A chip’s specifications contain many details that can be useful when evaluating this
chip for each specific use case. However, the main characteristics that matter across
use cases are computational capabilities, memory size and bandwidth, and power
consumption. I’ll use GPUs as examples to illustrate these characteristics.

16 While a chip can be developed to run one model architecture, a model architecture can be developed to make

the most out of a chip, too. For example, the transformer was originally designed by Google to run fast on
TPUs and only later optimized on GPUs.

Understanding Inference Optimization

|

421

Computational capabilities
Computational capabilities are typically measured by the number of operations a
chip can perform in a given time. The most common metric is FLOP/s, often written
as FLOPS, which measures the peak number of floating-point operations per second.
In reality, however, it’s very unlikely that an application can achieve this peak
FLOP/s. The ratio between the actual FLOP/s and the theoretical FLOP/s is one uti‐
lization metric.
The number of operations a chip can perform in a second depends on the numerical
precision—the higher the precision, the fewer operations the chip can execute. Think
about how adding two 32-bit numbers generally requires twice the computation of
adding two 16-bit numbers. The number of 32-bit operations a chip can perform in a
given time is not exactly half that of 16-bit operations because of different chips’ opti‐
mization. For an overview of numerical precision, revisit “Numerical Representa‐
tions” on page 325.
Table 9-2 shows the FLOP/s specs for different precision formats for NVIDIA H100
SXM chips.
Table 9-2. FLOP/s specs for NVIDIA H100 SXM chips.
Numerical precision
TF32 Tensor Corea
BFLOAT16 Tensor Core
FP16 Tensor Core
FP8 Tensor Core

teraFLOP/s (trillion FLOP/s) with sparsity
989
1,979
1,979
3,958

a Recall from Chapter 7 that TF32 is a 19-bit, not 32-bit, format.

Memory size and bandwidth
Because a GPU has many cores working in parallel, data often needs to be moved
from the memory to these cores, and, therefore, data transfer speed is important.
Data transfer is crucial when working with AI models that involve large weight
matrices and training data. These large amounts of data need to be moved quickly to
keep the cores efficiently occupied. Therefore, GPU memory needs to have higher
bandwidth and lower latency than CPU memory, and thus, GPU memory requires
more advanced memory technologies. This is one of the factors that makes GPU
memory more expensive than CPU memory.

422

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

To be more specific, CPUs typically use DDR SDRAM (Double Data Rate Synchro‐
nous Dynamic Random-Access Memory), which has a 2D structure. GPUs, particu‐
larly high-end ones, often use HBM (high-bandwidth memory), which has a 3D
stacked structure.17
An accelerator’s memory is measured by its size and bandwidth. These numbers need
to be evaluated within the system an accelerator is part of. An accelerator, such as a
GPU, typically interacts with three levels of memory, as visualized in Figure 9-7:
CPU memory (DRAM)
Accelerators are usually deployed alongside CPUs, giving them access to the
CPU memory (also known as system memory, host memory, or just CPU
DRAM).
CPU memory usually has the lowest bandwidth among these memory types, with
data transfer speeds ranging from 25 GB/s to 50 GB/s. CPU memory size varies.
Average laptops might have around 16–64 GB, whereas high-end workstations
can have one TB or more.
GPU high-bandwidth memory (HBM)
This is the memory dedicated to the GPU, located close to the GPU for faster
access than CPU memory.
HBM provides significantly higher bandwidth, with data transfer speeds typically
ranging from 256 GB/s to over 1.5 TB/s. This speed is essential for efficiently
handling large data transfers and high-throughput tasks. A consumer GPU has
around 24–80 GB of HBM.
GPU on-chip SRAM
Integrated directly into the chip, this memory is used to store frequently accessed
data and instructions for nearly instant access. It includes L1 and L2 caches made
of SRAM, and, in some architectures, L3 caches as well. These caches are part of
the broader on-chip memory, which also includes other components like register
files and shared memory.
RAM has extremely high data transfer speeds, often exceeding 10 TB/s. The size
of GPU SRAM is small, typically 40 MB or under.

17 Lower-end to mid-range GPUs might use GDDR (Graphics Double Data Rate) memory.

Understanding Inference Optimization

|

423

Figure 9-7. The memory hierarchy of an AI accelerator. The numbers are for reference
only. The actual numbers vary for each chip.
A lot of GPU optimization is about how to make the most out of this memory hierar‐
chy. However, as of this writing, popular frameworks such as PyTorch and Tensor‐
Flow don’t yet allow fine-grained control of memory access. This has led many AI
researchers and engineers to become interested in GPU programming languages such
as CUDA (originally Compute Unified Device Architecture), OpenAI’s Triton, and
ROCm (Radeon Open Compute). The latter is AMD’s open source alternative to
NVIDIA’s proprietary CUDA.

Power consumption
Chips rely on transistors to perform computation. Each computation is done by tran‐
sistors switching on and off, which requires energy. A GPU can have billions of tran‐
sistors—an NVIDIA A100 has 54 billion transistors, while an NVIDIA H100 has 80
billion. When an accelerator is used efficiently, billions of transistors rapidly switch
states, consuming a substantial amount of energy and generating a nontrivial amount
of heat. This heat requires cooling systems, which also consume electricity, adding to
data centers’ overall energy consumption.
Chip energy consumption threatens to have a staggering impact on the environment,
increasing the pressure on companies to invest in technologies for green data centers.
An NVIDIA H100 running at its peak for a year consumes approximately 7,000 kWh.
For comparison, the average US household’s annual electricity consumption is 10,000
kWh. That’s why electricity is a bottleneck to scaling up compute.18

18 A main challenge in building data centers with tens of thousands of GPUs is finding a location that can guar‐

antee the necessary electricity. Building large-scale data centers requires navigating electricity supply, speed,
and geopolitical constraints. For example, remote regions might provide cheaper electricity but can increase
network latency, making the data centers less appealing for use cases with stringent latency requirements like
inference.

424

| Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Accelerators typically specify their power consumption under maximum power draw
or a proxy metric TDP (thermal design power):
• Maximum power draw indicates the peak power that the chip could draw under
full load.
• TDP represents the maximum heat a cooling system needs to dissipate when the
chip operates under typical workloads. While it’s not an exact measure of power
consumption, it’s an indication of the expected power draw. For CPUs and
GPUs, the maximum power draw can be roughly 1.1 to 1.5 times the TDP,
though the exact relationship varies depending on the specific architecture and
workload.
If you opt for cloud providers, you won’t need to worry about cooling or electricity.
However, these numbers can still be of interest to understand the impact of accelera‐
tors on the environment and the overall electricity demand.

Selecting Accelerators
What accelerators to use depends on your workload. If your workloads are computebound, you might want to look for chips with more FLOP/s. If your workloads are
memory-bound, shelling out money for chips with higher bandwidth and more
memory will make your life easier.
When evaluating which chips to buy, there are three main questions:
• Can the hardware run your workloads?
• How long does it take to do so?
• How much does it cost?
FLOP/s, memory size, and memory bandwidth are the three big numbers that help
you answer the first two questions. The last question is straightforward. Cloud pro‐
viders’ pricing is typically usage-based and fairly similar across providers. If you buy
your hardware, the cost can be calculated based on the initial price and ongoing
power consumption.

Understanding Inference Optimization

|

425

Inference Optimization
Inference optimization can be done at the model, hardware, or service level. To illus‐
trate their differences, consider archery. Model-level optimization is like crafting bet‐
ter arrows. Hardware-level optimization is like training a stronger and better archer.
Service-level optimization is like refining the entire shooting process, including the
bow and aiming conditions.
Ideally, optimizing a model for speed and cost shouldn’t change the model’s quality.
However, many techniques might cause model degradation. Figure 9-8 shows the
same Llama models’ performance on different benchmarks, served by different infer‐
ence service providers.

Figure 9-8. An inference service provider might use optimization techniques that can
alter a model’s behavior, causing different providers to have slight model quality varia‐
tions. The experiment was conducted by Cerebras (2024).
Since hardware design is outside the scope of this book, I’ll discuss techniques at the
model and service levels. While the techniques are discussed separately, keep in mind
that, in production, optimization typically involves techniques at more than one
level.

Model Optimization
Model-level optimization aims to make the model more efficient, often by modifying
the model itself, which can alter its behavior. As of this writing, many foundation
models follow the transformer architecture and include an autoregressive language
model component. These models have three characteristics that make inference
resource-intensive: model size, autoregressive decoding, and the attention mecha‐
nism. Let’s discuss approaches to address these challenges.
426

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Model compression
Model compression involves techniques that reduce a model’s size. Making a model
smaller can also make it faster. This book has already discussed two model compres‐
sion techniques: quantization and distillation. Quantization, reducing the precision
of a model to reduce its memory footprint and increase its throughput, is discussed in
Chapter 7. Model distillation, training a small model to mimic the behavior of the
large model, is discussed in Chapter 8.
Model distillation suggests that it’s possible to capture a large model’s behaviors
using fewer parameters. Could it be that within the large model, there exists a subset
of parameters capable of capturing the entire model’s behavior? This is the core con‐
cept behind pruning.
Pruning, in the context of neural networks, has two meanings. One is to remove
entire nodes of a neural network, which means changing its architecture and reduc‐
ing its number of parameters. Another is to find parameters least useful to predic‐
tions and set them to zero. In this case, pruning doesn’t reduce the total number of
parameters, only the number of non-zero parameters. This makes the model more
sparse, which both reduces the model’s storage space and speeds up computation.
Pruned models can be used as-is or be further finetuned to adjust the remaining
parameters and restore any performance degradation caused by the pruning process.
Pruning can help discover promising model architectures (Liu et al., 2018). These
pruned architectures, smaller than the pre-pruned architectures, can also be trained
from scratch (Zhu et al., 2017).
In the literature, there have been many encouraging pruning results. For example,
Frankle and Carbin (2019) showed that pruning techniques can reduce the non-zero
parameter counts of certain trained networks by over 90%, decreasing memory foot‐
prints and improving speed without compromising accuracy. However, in practice,
as of this writing, pruning is less common. It’s harder to do, as it requires an under‐
standing of the original model’s architecture, and the performance boost it can bring
is often much less than that of other approaches. Pruning also results in sparse mod‐
els, and not all hardware architectures are designed to take advantage of the resulting
sparsity.
Weight-only quantization is by far the most popular approach since it’s easy to use,
works out of the box for many models, and is extremely effective. Reducing a model’s
precision from 32 bits to 16 bits reduces its memory footprint by half. However, we’re
close to the limit of quantization—we can’t go lower than 1 bit per value. Distillation
is also common because it can result in a smaller model whose behavior is compara‐
tive to that of a much larger one for your needs.

Inference Optimization

|

427

Overcoming the autoregressive decoding bottleneck
As discussed in Chapter 2, autoregressive language models generate one token after
another. If it takes 100 ms to generate one token, a response of 100 tokens will take
10 s.19 This process is not just slow, it’s also expensive. Across model API providers,
an output token costs approximately two to four times an input token. In an experi‐
ment, Anyscale found that a single output token can have the same impact on latency
as 100 input tokens (Kadous et al., 2023). Improving the autoregressive generation
process by a small percentage can significantly improve user experience.
As the space is rapidly evolving, new techniques are being developed to overcome
this seemingly impossible bottleneck. Perhaps one day, there will be architectures
that don’t have this bottleneck. The techniques covered here are to illustrate what the
solution might look like, but the techniques are still evolving.

Speculative decoding. Speculative decoding (also called speculative sampling) uses a

faster but less powerful model to generate a sequence of tokens, which are then veri‐
fied by the target model. The target model is the model you want to use. The faster
model is called the draft or proposal model because it proposes the draft output.
Imagine the input tokens are x1, x2, …, xt:
1. The draft model generates a sequence of K tokens: xt + 1, xt + 2, …, xt + K.
2. The target model verifies these K generated tokens in parallel.
3. The target model accepts the longest subsequence of draft tokens, from left to
right, which the target model agrees to use.
4. Let’s say the target model accepts j draft tokens, xt + 1, xt + 2, …, xt + j. The target
model then generates one extra token, xt + j + 1.
The process returns to step 1, with the draft model generating K tokens conditioned
on x1, x2, …, xt, xt + 1, xt + 2, …, xt + j. The process is visualized in Figure 9-9.
If no draft token is accepted, this loop produces only one token generated by the tar‐
get model. If all draft tokens are accepted, this loop produces K + 1 tokens, with K
generated by the draft model and one by the target model.

19 Each token generation step necessitates the transfer of the entire model’s parameters from the accelerator’s

high-bandwidth memory to its compute units. This makes this operation bandwidth-heavy. Because the
model can produce only one token at a time, the process consumes only a small number of FLOP/s, resulting
in computational inefficiency.

428

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Figure 9-9. A draft model generates a sequence of K tokens, and the main model accepts
the longest subsequence that it agrees with. The image is from “Blockwise Parallel
Decoding for Deep Autoregressive Models” (Stern et al., 2018).
If all draft sequences are rejected, the target model must generate the entire response
in addition to verifying it, potentially leading to increased latency. However, this can
be avoided because of these three insights:
1. The time it takes for the target model to verify a sequence of tokens is less than
the time it takes to generate it, because verification is parallelizable, while genera‐
tion is sequential. Speculative decoding effectively turns the computation profile
of decoding into that of prefilling.
2. In an output token sequence, some tokens are easier to predict than others. It’s
possible to find a weaker draft model capable of getting these easier-to-predict
tokens right, leading to a high acceptance rate of the draft tokens.
3. Decoding is memory bandwidth-bound, which means that during the coding
process, there are typically idle FLOPs that can be used for free verification.20
Acceptance rates are domain-dependent. For texts that follow specific structures like
code, the acceptance rate is typically higher. Larger values of K mean fewer verifying
calls for the target model but a low acceptance rate of the draft tokens. The draft
model can be of any architecture, though ideally it should share the same vocabulary
and tokenizer as the target model. You can train a custom draft model or use an
existing weaker model.

20 This also means that if your MFU is already maxed out, speculative decoding makes less sense.

Inference Optimization

|

429

For example, to speed up the decoding process of Chinchilla-70B, DeepMind trained
a 4B-parameter draft model of the same architecture (Chen et al., 2023). The draft
model can generate a token eight times faster than the target model (1.8 ms/token
compared to 14.1 ms/token). This reduces the overall response latency by more than
half without compromising response quality. A similar speed-up was achieved for
T5-XXL (Laviathan et al., 2022).
This approach has gained traction because it’s relatively easy to implement and
doesn’t change a model’s quality. For example, it’s possible to do so in 50 lines of
code in PyTorch. It’s been incorporated into popular inference frameworks such as
vLLM, TensorRT-LLM, and llama.cpp.

Inference with reference. Often, a response needs to reference tokens from the input.
For example, if you ask your model a question about an attached document, the
model might repeat a chunk of text verbatim from the document. Another example is
if you ask the model to fix bugs in a piece of code, the model might reuse the majority
of the original code with minor changes. Instead of making the model generate these
repeated tokens, what if we copy these tokens from the input to speed up the genera‐
tion? This is the core idea behind inference with reference.
Inference with reference is similar to speculative decoding, but instead of using a
model to generate draft tokens, it selects draft tokens from the input. The key chal‐
lenge is to develop an algorithm to identify the most relevant text span from the con‐
text at each decoding step. The simplest option is to find a text span that matches the
current tokens.
Unlike speculative decoding, inference with reference doesn’t require an extra model.
However, it’s useful only in generation scenarios where there’s a significant overlap
between contexts and outputs, such as in retrieval systems, coding, or multi-turn
conversations. In “Inference with Reference: Lossless Acceleration of Large Language
Models” (Yang et al., 2023), this technique helps achieve two times generation
speedup in such use cases.
Examples of how inference with reference works are shown in Figure 9-10.

430

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Figure 9-10. Two examples of inference with reference. The text spans that are success‐
fully copied from the input are in red and green. Image from Yang et al. (2023). The
image is licensed under CC BY 4.0.

Inference Optimization

|

431

Parallel decoding. Instead of making autoregressive generation faster with draft
tokens, some techniques aim to break the sequential dependency. Given an existing
sequence of tokens x1, x2,…,xt, these techniques attempt to generate xt + 1, xt + 2,…,xt + k
simultaneously. This means that the model generates xt + 2 before it knows that the
token before it is xt + 1.
This can work because the knowledge of the existing sequence often is sufficient to
predict the next few tokens. For example, given “the cat sits”, without knowing that
the next token is “on”, “under”, or “behind”, you might still predict that the word
after it is “the”.
The parallel tokens can be generated by the same decoder, as in Lookahead decoding
(Fu et al., 2024), or by different decoding heads, as in Medusa (Cai et al., 2024). In
Medusa, the original model is extended with multiple decoding heads, and each head
is a small neural network layer that is then trained to predict a future token at a spe‐
cific position. If the original model is trained to predict the next token xt + 1, the kth
head will predict the token xt + k + 1. These heads are trained together with the original
model, but the original model is frozen. NVIDIA claimed Medusa helped boost
Llama 3.1 token generation by up to 1.9× on their HGX H200 GPUs (Eassa et al.,
2024).
However, because these tokens aren’t generated sequentially, they need to be verified
to make sure that they fit together. An essential part of parallel decoding is verifica‐
tion and integration. Lookahead decoding uses the Jacobi method 21 to verify the gen‐
erated tokens, which works as follows:
1. K future tokens are generated in parallel.
2. These K tokens are verified for coherence and consistency with the context.
3. If one or more tokens fail verification, instead of aggregating all K future tokens,
the model regenerates or adjusts only these failed tokens.
The model keeps refining the generated tokens until they all pass verification and are
integrated into the final output. This family of parallel decoding algorithms is also
called Jacobi decoding.
On the other hand, Medusa uses a tree-based attention mechanism to verify and inte‐
grate tokens. Each Medusa head produces several options for each position. These
options are then organized into a tree-like structure to select the most promising
combination. The process is visualized in Figure 9-11.

21 The Jacobi method is an iterative algorithm where multiple parts of a solution can be updated simultaneously

and independently.

432

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Figure 9-11. In Medusa (Cai et al., 2024), each head predicts several options for a token
position. The most promising sequence from these options is selected. Image adapted
from the paper, which is licensed under CC BY 4.0.
While the perspective of being able to circumvent sequential dependency is appeal‐
ing, parallel decoding is not intuitive, and some techniques, like Medusa, can be chal‐
lenging to implement.

Attention mechanism optimization
Recall from Chapter 2 that generating the next token requires the key and value vec‐
tors for all previous tokens. This means that the following applies:
• Generating token xt requires the key and value vectors for tokens x1, x2, …, xt – 1.
• Generating token xt + 1 requires the key and value vectors for tokens x1, x2, …,xt – 1,
xt.
When generating token xt + 1, instead of computing the key and value vectors for
tokens x1, x2, …, xt – 1 again, you reuse these vectors from the previous step. This
means that you’ll need to compute the key and value vectors for only the most recent
token, xt. The cache that stores key and value vectors for reuse is called the KV cache.
The newly computed key and value vectors are then added to the KV cache, which is
visualized in Figure 9-12.
Inference Optimization

|

433

Figure 9-12. To avoid recomputing the key and value vectors at each decoding step, use
a KV cache to store these vectors to reuse.
A KV cache is used only during inference, not training. During
training, because all tokens in a sequence are known in advance,
next token generation can be computed all at once instead of
sequentially, as during inference. Therefore, there’s no need for a
KV cache.

Because generating a token requires computing the attention scores with all previous
tokens, the number of attention computations grows exponentially with sequence
length.22 The KV cache size, on the other hand, grows linearly with sequence length.
The KV cache size also grows with larger batch sizes. A Google paper calculated that
for a 500B+ model with multi-head attention, batch size 512, and context length
2048, the KV cache totals 3TB (Pope et al., 2022). This is three times the size of that
model’s weights.
The KV cache size is ultimately limited by the available hardware storage, creating a
bottleneck for running applications with long context. A large cache size also takes
time to load into memory, which can be an issue for applications with strict latency.
The computation and memory requirements of the attention mechanism are one of
the reasons why it’s so hard to have longer context.
Many techniques have been developed to make the attention mechanism more effi‐
cient. In general, they fall into three buckets: redesigning the attention mechanism,
optimizing the KV cache, and writing kernels for attention computation.

22 The number of attention computations for an autoregressive model is O(n2).

434

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Calculating the KV Cache Size
The memory needed for the KV cache, without any optimization, is calculated as
follows:
2×B×S×L×H×M
• B: batch size
• S: sequence length
• L: number of transformer layers
• H: model dimension
• M: memory needed for the cache’s numerical representation (e.g., FP16 or FP32).
This value can become substantial as the context length increases. For example,
LLama 2 13B has 40 layers and a model dimension of 5,120. With a batch size of 32,
sequence length of 2,048, and 2 bytes per value, the memory needed for its KV cache,
without any optimization, is 2 × 32 × 2,048 × 40 × 5,120 × 2 = 54 GB.

Redesigning the attention mechanism. These techniques involve altering how the atten‐
tion mechanism works. Even though these techniques help optimize inference,
because they change a model’s architecture directly, they can be applied only during
training or finetuning.
For example, when generating a new token, instead of attending to all previous
tokens, local windowed attention attends only to a fixed size window of nearby tokens
(Beltagy et al., 2020). This reduces the effective sequence length to a fixed size win‐
dow, reducing both the KV cache and the attention computation. If the average
sequence length is 10,000 tokens, attending to a window size of 1,000 tokens reduces
the KV cache size by 10 times.
Local windowed attention can be interleaved with global attention, with local atten‐
tion capturing nearby context; the global attention captures task-specific information
across the document.
Both cross-layer attention (Brandon et al., 2024) and multi-query attention (Shazeer,
2019) reduce the memory footprint of the KV cache by reducing the number of keyvalue pairs. Cross-layer attention shares key and value vectors across adjacent layers.
Having three layers sharing the same key-value vectors means reducing the KV cache
three times. On the other hand, multi-query attention shares key-value vectors across
query heads.

Inference Optimization

|

435

Grouped-query attention (Ainslie et al., 2023) is a generalization of multi-query atten‐
tion. Instead of using only one set of key-value pairs for all query heads, its groupedquery attention puts query heads into smaller groups and shares key-value pairs only
among query heads in the same group. This allows for a more flexible balance
between the number of query heads and the number of key-value pairs.
Character.AI, an AI chatbot application, shares that their average conversation has a
dialogue history of 180 messages (2024). Given the typically long sequences, the pri‐
mary bottleneck for inference throughput is the KV cache size. Three attention
mechanism designs—multi-query attention, interleaving local attention and global
attention, and cross-layer attention—help them reduce KV cache by over 20 times.
More importantly, this significant KV cache reduction means that memory is no
longer a bottleneck for them for serving large batch sizes.

Optimizing the KV cache size. The way the KV cache is managed is critical in mitigating

the memory bottleneck during inference and enabling a larger batch size, especially
for applications with long context. Many techniques are actively being developed to
reduce and manage the KV cache.
One of the fastest growing inference frameworks, vLLM, gained popularity for intro‐
ducing PagedAttention, which optimizes memory management by dividing the KV
cache into non-contiguous blocks, reducing fragmentation, and enabling flexible
memory sharing to improve LLM serving efficiency (Kwon et al., 2023).
Other techniques include KV cache quantization (Hooper et al., 2024; Kang et al.,
2024), adaptive KV cache compression (Ge et al., 2023), and selective KV cache (Liu
et al., 2024).

Writing kernels for attention computation. Instead of changing the mechanism design

or optimizing the storage, this approach looks into how attention scores are compu‐
ted and finds ways to make this computation more efficient. This approach is the
most effective when it takes into account the hardware executing the computation.
The code optimized for a specific chip is called a kernel. Kernel writing will be dis‐
cussed further in the next section.
One of the most well-known kernels optimized for attention computation is FlashAt‐
tention (Dao et al., 2022). This kernel fused together many operations commonly
used in a transformer-based model to make them run faster, as shown in Figure 9-13.

436

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Figure 9-13. FlashAttention is a kernel that fuses together several common operators.
Adapted from an original image licensed under BSD 3-Clause.

Kernels and compilers
Kernels are specialized pieces of code optimized for specific hardware accelerators,
such as GPUs or TPUs. They are typically written to perform computationally inten‐
sive routines that need to be executed repeatedly, often in parallel, to maximize the
performance of these accelerators.
Common AI operations, including matrix multiplication, attention computation, and
convolution operation, all have specialized kernels to make their computation more
efficient on different hardware.23
Writing kernels requires a deep understanding of the underlying hardware architec‐
ture. This includes knowledge about how the memory hierarchy is structured (such
as caches, global memory, shared memory, and registers) and how data is accessed
and moved between these different levels.
Moreover, kernels are typically written in lower-level programming languages like
CUDA (for NVIDIA GPUs), Triton (a language developed by OpenAI for writing
custom kernels), and ROCm (for AMD GPUs). These languages allow fine-grained
control over thread management and memory access but are also harder to learn
than the languages that most AI engineers are familiar with, like Python.
Due to this entry barrier, writing kernels used to be a dark art practiced by a few.
Chip makers like NVIDIA and AMD employ optimization engineers to write kernels
to make their hardware efficient for AI workloads, whereas AI frameworks like
23 Convolution operations are often used in image generation models like Stable Diffusion.

Inference Optimization

|

437

PyTorch and TensorFlow employ kernel engineers to optimize their frameworks on
different accelerators.
However, with the rising demand for inference optimization and the ubiquity of
accelerators, more AI engineers have taken an interest in writing kernels. There are
many great online tutorials for kernel writing. Here, I’ll cover four common tech‐
niques often used to speed up computation:
Vectorization
Given a loop or a nested loop, instead of processing one data element at a time,
simultaneously execute multiple data elements that are contiguous in memory.
This reduces latency by minimizing data I/O operations.
Parallelization
Divide an input array (or n-dimensional array) into independent chunks that can
be processed simultaneously on different cores or threads, speeding up the com‐
putation.
Loop tiling
Optimize the data accessing order in a loop for the hardware’s memory layout
and cache. This optimization is hardware-dependent. An efficient CPU tiling
pattern may not work well on GPUs.
Operator fusion
Combine multiple operators into a single pass to avoid redundant memory
access. For example, if two loops operate over the same array, they can be fused
into one, reducing the number of times data is read and written.
While vectorization, parallelization, and loop tiling can be applied broadly across
different models, operator fusion requires a deeper understanding of a model’s
specific operators and architecture. As a result, operator fusion demands more
attention from optimization engineers.
Kernels are optimized for a hardware architecture. This means that whenever a new
hardware architecture is introduced, new kernels need to be developed. For example,
FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022) was originally developed primarily for NVIDIA
A100 GPUs. Later on, FlashAttention-3 was introduced for H100 GPUs (Shah et al.,
2024).
A model script specifies a series of operations that need to be performed to execute
that model. To run this code on a piece of hardware, such as a GPU, it has to be con‐
verted into a language compatible with that hardware. This process is called lowering.
A tool that lowers code to run a specific hardware is called a compiler. Compilers
bridge ML models and the hardware they run on. During the lowering process,
whenever possible, these operations are converted into specialized kernels to run
faster on the target hardware.
438

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Inference Optimization Case Study from PyTorch
Figure 9-14 shows how much throughput improvement the PyTorch team could give
to Llama-7B through the following optimization steps (PyTorch, 2023):
1. Call torch.compile to compile the model into more efficient kernels.
2. Quantize the model weights to INT8.
3. Further quantize the model weights to INT4.
4. Add speculative decoding.

Figure 9-14. Throughput improvement by different optimization techniques in
PyTorch. Image from PyTorch (2023).
The experiment was run on an A100 GPU with 80 GB of memory. It was unclear how
these optimization steps impact the model’s output quality.

Inference Optimization

|

439

Compilers can be standalone tools, such as Apache TVM and MLIR (Multi-Level
Intermediate Representation) or integrated into ML and inference frameworks, like
torch.compile (a feature in PyTorch), XLA (Accelerated Linear Algebra, originally
developed by TensorFlow, with an open source version called OpenXLA), and the
compiler built into the TensorRT, which is optimized for NVIDIA GPUs. AI compa‐
nies might have their own compilers, with their proprietary kernels designed to speed
up their own workloads.24

Inference Service Optimization
Most service-level optimization techniques focus on resource management. Given a
fixed amount of resources (compute and memory) and dynamic workloads (infer‐
ence requests from users that may involve different models), the goal is to efficiently
allocate resources to these workloads to optimize for latency and cost. Unlike many
model-level techniques, service-level techniques don’t modify models and shouldn’t
change the output quality.

Batching
One of the easiest ways to reduce your cost is batching. In production, your inference
service might receive multiple requests simultaneously. Instead of processing each
request separately, batching the requests that arrive around the same time together
can significantly reduce the service’s throughput. If processing each request sepa‐
rately is like everyone driving their own car, batching is like putting them together on
a bus. A bus can move more people, but it can also make each person’s journey
longer. However, if you do it intelligently, the impact on latency can be minimal.
The three main techniques for batching are: static batching, dynamic batching, and
continuous batching.
The simplest batching technique is static batching. The service groups a fixed number
of inputs together in a batch. It’s like a bus that waits until every seat is filled before
departing. The drawback of static batching is that all requests have to wait until the
batch is full to be executed. Thus the first request in a batch is delayed until the
batch’s last request arrives, no matter how late the last request is.

24 Many companies consider their kernels their trade secrets. Having kernels that allow them to run models

faster and cheaper than their competitors is a competitive advantage.

440

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Dynamic batching, on the other hand, sets a maximum time window for each batch.
If the batch size is four and the window is 100 ms, the server processes the batch
either when it has four requests or when 100 ms has passed, whichever happens first.
It’s like a bus that leaves on a fixed schedule or when it’s full. This approach keeps
latency under control, so earlier requests aren’t held up by later ones. The downside
is that batches may not always be full when processed, possibly leading to wasted
compute. Static batching and dynamic batching are visualized in Figure 9-15.

Figure 9-15. Dynamic batching keeps the latency manageable but might be less
compute-efficient.
In naive batching implementations, all batch requests have to be completed before
their responses are returned. For LLMs, some requests might take much longer than
others. If one request in a batch generates only 10 response tokens and another
request generates 1,000 response tokens, the short response has to wait until the long
response is completed before being returned to the user. This results in unnecessary
latency for short requests.
Continuous batching allows responses in a batch to be returned to users as soon as
they are completed. It works by selectively batching operations that don’t cause the
generation of one response to hold up another, as introduced in the paper Orca (Yu
et al., 2022). After a request in a batch is completed and its response returned, the
service can add another request into the batch in its place, making the batching con‐
tinuous. It’s like a bus that, after dropping off one passenger, can immediately pick
up another passenger to maximize its occupancy rate. Continuous batching, also
called in-flight batching, is visualized in Figure 9-16.

Inference Optimization

|

441

Figure 9-16. With continuous batching, completed responses can be returned immedi‐
ately to users, and new requests can be processed in their place.

Decoupling prefill and decode
LLM inference consists of two steps: prefill and decode. Because prefill is computebound and decode is memory bandwidth-bound, using the same machine to perform
both can cause them to inefficiently compete for resources and significantly slow
down both TTFT and TPOT. Imagine a GPU that is already handling prefilling and
decoding near its peak computational capacity. It might be able to handle another
low computational job like decoding. However, adding a new query to this GPU
means introducing a prefilling job along with a decoding job. This one prefilling job
can drain computational resources from existing decoding jobs, slowing down TPOT
for these requests.
One common optimization technique for inference servers is to disaggregate prefill
and decode. “DistServe” (Zhong et al., 2024) and “Inference Without Interference”
(Hu et al., 2024) show that for various popular LLMs and applications, assigning pre‐
fill and decode operations to different instances (e.g., different GPUs) can signifi‐
cantly improve the volume of processed requests while adhering to latency
requirements. Even though decoupling requires transferring intermediate states from
prefill instances to decode instances, the paper shows communication overhead is not
substantial in modern GPU clusters with high-bandwidth connections such as
NVLink within a node.

442

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

The ratio of prefill instances to decode instances depends on many factors, such as
the workload characteristics (e.g., longer input lengths require more prefill compute)
and latency requirements (e.g., whether you want lower TTFT or TPOT). For exam‐
ple, if input sequences are usually long and you want to prioritize TTFT, this ratio
can be between 2:1 and 4:1. If input sequences are short and you want to prioritize
TPOT, this ratio can be 1:2 to 1:1.25

Prompt caching
Many prompts in an application have overlapping text segments. A prompt cache
stores these overlapping segments for reuse, so you only need to process them once.
A common overlapping text segment in different prompts is the system prompt.
Without a prompt cache, your model needs to process the system prompt with every
query. With a prompt cache, the system prompt needs to be processed just once for
the first query.
Prompt caching is useful for queries that involve long documents. For example, if
many of your user queries are related to the same long document (such as a book or a
codebase), this long document can be cached for reuse across queries. It’s also useful
for long conversations when the processing of earlier messages can be cached and
reused when predicting future messages.
A prompt cache is visualized in Figure 9-17. It’s also called a context cache or prefix
cache.

Figure 9-17. With a prompt cache, overlapping segments in different prompts can be
cached and reused.

25 Talks mentioning the prefill to decode instance ratio include “Llama Inference at Meta” (Meta, 2024).

Inference Optimization

|

443

For applications with long system prompts, prompt caching can significantly reduce
both latency and cost. If your system prompt is 1,000 tokens, and your application
generates one million model API calls daily, a prompt cache will save you from pro‐
cessing approximately one billion repetitive input tokens a day! However, this isn’t
entirely free. Like the KV cache, prompt cache size can be quite large and take up
memory space. Unless you use a model API with this functionality, implementing
prompt caching can require significant engineering effort.
Since its introduction in November 2023 by Gim et al., the prompt cache has been
rapidly incorporated into model APIs. As of this writing, Google Gemini offers this
functionality, with cached input tokens given a 75% discount compared to regular
input tokens, but you’ll have to pay extra for cache storage (as of writing, $1.00/one
million tokens per hour). Anthropic offers prompt caching that promises up to 90%
cost savings (the longer the cached context, the higher the savings) and up to 75%
latency reduction. The impact of prompt caching on the cost and latency of different
scenarios is shown in Table 9-3.26
Table 9-3. Cost and latency reduced by prompt caching. Information from Anthropic
(2024).
Use case

Latency w/o caching
(time to first token)
11.5 s

Chat with a book (100,000token cached prompt)
Many-shot prompting
1.6 s
(10,000-token prompt)
Multi-turn conversation (10- ~10 s
turn convo with a long system
prompt)

Latency with caching
(time to first token)
2.4 s (–79%)

Cost reduction

1.1 s (–31%)

–86%

~2.5 s (–75%)

–53%

–90%

Parallelism
Accelerators are designed for parallel processing, and parallelism strategies are the
backbone of high-performance computing. Many new parallelization strategies are
being developed. This section covers only a few of them for reference. Two families of
parallelization strategies that can be applied across all models are data parallelism and
model parallelism. A family of strategies applied specifically for LLMs is context and
sequence parallelism. An optimization technique might involve multiple parallelism
strategies.

26 While llama.cpp also has prompt caching, it seems to cache only whole prompts and work for queries in the

same chat session, as of this writing. Its documentation is limited, but my guess from reading the code is that
in a long conversation, it caches the previous messages and processes only the newest message.

444

| Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

Replica parallelism is the most straightforward strategy to implement. It simply cre‐
ates multiple replicas of the model you want to serve.27 More replicas allow you to
handle more requests at the same time, potentially at the cost of using more chips.
Trying to fit models of different sizes onto different chips is a bin-packing problem,
which can get complicated with more models, more replicas, and more chips.
Let’s say you have a mixture of models of different sizes (e.g., 8B, 13B, 34B, and 70B
parameters) and access to GPUs of different memory capabilities (e.g., 24 GB, 40 GB,
48 GB, and 80 GB). For simplicity, assume that all models are in the same precision, 8
bits:
• If you have a fixed number of chips, you need to decide how many replicas to
create for each model and what GPUs to use for each replica to maximize your
metrics. For example, should you place three 13B models on a 40 GB GPU, or
should you reserve this GPU for one 34B model?
• If you have a fixed number of model replicas, you need to decide what chips to
acquire to minimize the cost. This situation, however, rarely occurs.
Often, your model is so big that it can’t fit into one machine. Model parallelism refers
to the practice of splitting the same model across multiple machines. Fitting models
onto chips can become an even more complicated problem with model parallelism.
There are several ways to split a model. The most common approach for inference is
tensor parallelism, also known as intra-operator parallelism. Inference involves a
sequence of operators on multidimensional tensors, such as matrix multiplication. In
this approach, tensors involved in an operator are partitioned across multiple devices,
effectively breaking up this operator into smaller pieces to be executed in parallel,
thus speeding up the computation. For example, when multiplying two matrices, you
can split one of the matrices columnwise, as shown in Figure 9-18.
Tensor parallelism provides two benefits. First, it makes it possible to serve large
models that don’t fit on single machines. Second, it reduces latency. The latency ben‐
efit, however, might be reduced due to extra communication overhead.

27 During training, the same technique is called data parallelism.

Inference Optimization

|

445

Figure 9-18. Tensor parallelism for matrix multiplication.
Another way to split a model is pipeline parallelism, which involves dividing a
model’s computation into distinct stages and assigning each stage to a different
device. As data flows through the model, each stage processes one part while others
process subsequent parts, enabling overlapping computations. Figure 9-19 shows
what pipeline parallelism looks like on four machines.

Figure 9-19. Pipeline parallelism enables model splits to be executed in parallel.
Figure 9-19 shows a batch can be split into smaller micro-batches. After a microbatch is processed on one machine, its output is passed onto the next part of the
model on the next machine.

446

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

While pipeline parallelism enables serving large models on multiple machines, it
increases the total latency for each request due to extra communication between
pipeline stages. Therefore, for applications with strict latency requirements, pipeline
parallelism is typically avoided in favor of replica parallelism. However, pipeline par‐
allelism is commonly used in training since it can help increase throughput.
Two techniques that are less common but might warrant a quick mention to illustrate
the diversity of techniques are context parallelism and sequence parallelism. They
were both developed to make long input sequence processing more efficient, includ‐
ing context parallelism and sequence parallelism.
In context parallelism, the input sequence itself is split across different devices to be
processed separately. For example, the first half of the input is processed on machine
1 and the second half on machine 2.
In sequence parallelism, operators needed for the entire input are split across
machines. For example, if the input requires both attention and feedforward compu‐
tation, attention might be processed on machine 1 while feedforward is processed on
machine 2.

Summary
A model’s usability depends heavily on its inference cost and latency. Cheaper infer‐
ence makes AI-powered decisions more affordable, while faster inference enables the
integration of AI into more applications. Given the massive potential impact of infer‐
ence optimization, it has attracted many talented individuals who continually come
up with innovative approaches.
Before we start making things more efficient, we need to understand how efficiency is
measured. This chapter started with common efficiency metrics for latency, through‐
put, and utilization. For language model-based inference, latency can be broken into
time to first token (TTFT), which is influenced by the prefilling phase, and time per
output token (TPOT), which is influenced by the decoding phase. Throughput met‐
rics are directly related to cost. There’s a trade-off between latency and throughput.
You can potentially reduce cost if you’re okay with increased latency, and reducing
latency often involves increasing cost.
How efficiently a model can run depends on the hardware it is run on. For this rea‐
son, this chapter also provided a quick overview of AI hardware and what it takes to
optimize models on different accelerators.
The chapter then continued with different techniques for inference optimization.
Given the availability of model APIs, most application developers will use these APIs
with their built-in optimization instead of implementing these techniques them‐
selves. While these techniques might not be relevant to all application developers, I

Summary

|

447

believe that understanding what techniques are possible can be helpful for evaluating
the efficiency of model APIs.
This chapter also focused on optimization at the model level and the inference service
level. Model-level optimization often requires changing the model itself, which can
lead to changes in the model behaviors. Inference service-level optimization, on the
other hand, typically keeps the model intact and only changes how it’s served.
Model-level techniques include model-agnostic techniques like quantization and dis‐
tillation. Different model architectures require their own optimization. For example,
because a key bottleneck of transformer models is in the attention mechanism, many
optimization techniques involve making attention more efficient, including KV cache
management and writing attention kernels. A big bottleneck for an autoregressive
language model is in its autoregressive decoding process, and consequently, many
techniques have been developed to address it, too.
Inference service-level techniques include various batching and parallelism strategies.
There are also techniques developed especially for autoregressive language models,
including prefilling/decoding decoupling and prompt caching.
The choice of optimization techniques depends on your workloads. For example, KV
caching is significantly more important for workloads with long contexts than those
with short contexts. Prompt caching, on the other hand, is crucial for workloads
involving long, overlapping prompt segments or multi-turn conversations. The
choice also depends on your performance requirements. For instance, if low latency
is a higher priority than cost, you might want to scale up replica parallelism. While
more replicas require additional machines, each machine handles fewer requests,
allowing it to allocate more resources per request and, thus, improve response time.
However, across various use cases, the most impactful techniques are typically quan‐
tization (which generally works well across models), tensor parallelism (which both
reduces latency and enables serving larger models), replica parallelism (which is rela‐
tively straightforward to implement), and attention mechanism optimization (which
can significantly accelerate transformer models).
Inference optimization concludes the list of model adaptation techniques covered in
this book. The next chapter will explore how to integrate these techniques into a
cohesive system.

448

|

Chapter 9: Inference Optimization

CHAPTER 10

AI Engineering Architecture
and User Feedback

So far, this book has covered a wide range of techniques to adapt foundation models
to specific applications. This chapter will discuss how to bring these techniques
together to build successful products.
Given the wide range of AI engineering techniques and tools available, selecting the
right ones can feel overwhelming. To simplify this process, this chapter takes a grad‐
ual approach. It starts with the simplest architecture for a foundation model applica‐
tion, highlights the challenges of that architecture, and gradually adds components to
address them.
We can spend eternity reasoning about how to build a successful application, but the
only way to find out if an application actually achieves its goal is to put it in front of
users. User feedback has always been invaluable for guiding product development,
but for AI applications, user feedback has an even more crucial role as a data source
for improving models. The conversational interface makes it easier for users to give
feedback but harder for developers to extract signals. This chapter will discuss differ‐
ent types of conversational AI feedback and how to design a system to collect the
right feedback without hurting user experience.

AI Engineering Architecture
A full-fledged AI architecture can be complex. This section follows the process that a
team might follow in production, starting with the simplest architecture and progres‐
sively adding more components. Despite the diversity of AI applications, they share
many common components. The architecture proposed here has been validated at

449

multiple companies to be general for a wide range of applications, but certain appli‐
cations might deviate.
In its simplest form, your application receives a query and sends it to the model. The
model generates a response, which is returned to the user, as shown in Figure 10-1.
There is no context augmentation, no guardrails, and no optimization. The Model
API box refers to both third-party APIs (e.g., OpenAI, Google, Anthropic) and selfhosted models. Building an inference server for self-hosted models is discussed in
Chapter 9.

Figure 10-1. The simplest architecture for running an AI application.
From this simple architecture, you can add more components as needs arise. The
process might look as follows:
1. Enhance context input into a model by giving the model access to external data
sources and tools for information gathering.
2. Put in guardrails to protect your system and your users.
3. Add model router and gateway to support complex pipelines and add more
security.
4. Optimize for latency and costs with caching.
5. Add complex logic and write actions to maximize your system’s capabilities.
This chapter follows the progression I commonly see in production. However, every‐
one’s needs are different. You should follow the order that makes the most sense for
your application.
Monitoring and observability, which are integral to any application for quality con‐
trol and performance improvement, will be discussed at the end of this process.
Orchestration, chaining all these components together, will be discussed after that.

Step 1. Enhance Context
The initial expansion of a platform usually involves adding mechanisms to allow the
system to construct the relevant context needed by the model to answer each query.
As discussed in Chapter 6, context can be constructed through various retrieval
mechanisms, including text retrieval, image retrieval, and tabular data retrieval.

450

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

Context can also be augmented using tools that allow the model to automatically
gather information through APIs such as web search, news, weather, events, etc.
Context construction is like feature engineering for foundation models. It gives the
model the necessary information to produce an output. Due to its central role in a
system’s output quality, context construction is almost universally supported by
model API providers. For example, providers like OpenAI, Claude, and Gemini allow
users to upload files and allow their models to use tools.
However, just like models differ in their capabilities, these providers differ in their
context construction support. For example, they might have limitations on what
types of documents and how many you can upload. A specialized RAG solution
might let you upload as many documents as your vector database can accommodate,
but a generic model API might let you upload only a small number of documents.
Different frameworks also differ in their retrieval algorithms and other retrieval con‐
figurations, like chunk sizes. Similarly, for tool use, solutions also differ in the types
of tools they support and the modes of execution, such as whether they support par‐
allel function execution or long-running jobs.
With context construction, the architecture now looks like Figure 10-2.

Figure 10-2. A platform architecture with context construction.

Step 2. Put in Guardrails
Guardrails help mitigate risks and protect you and your users. They should be placed
whenever there are exposures to risks. In general, they can be categorized into guard‐
rails around inputs and outputs.

Input guardrails
Input guardrails typically protect against two types of risks: leaking private informa‐
tion to external APIs and executing bad prompts that compromise your system.

AI Engineering Architecture

|

451

Chapter 5 discusses many different ways attackers can exploit an application through
prompt hacks and how to defend your application against them. While you can miti‐
gate risks, they can never be fully eliminated, due to the inherent nature of how mod‐
els generate responses as well as unavoidable human failures.
Leaking private information to external APIs is a risk specific to using external model
APIs when you need to send your data outside your organization. This might happen
for many reasons, including the following:
• An employee copies the company’s secret or a user’s private information into a
prompt and sends it to a third-party API.1
• An application developer puts the company’s internal policies and data into the
application’s system prompt.
• A tool retrieves private information from an internal database and adds it to the
context.
There’s no airtight way to eliminate potential leaks when using third-party APIs.
However, you can mitigate them with guardrails. You can use one of the many avail‐
able tools that automatically detect sensitive data. What sensitive data to detect is
specified by you. Common sensitive data classes are the following:
• Personal information (ID numbers, phone numbers, bank accounts)
• Human faces
• Specific keywords and phrases associated with the company’s intellectual prop‐
erty or privileged information
Many sensitive data detection tools use AI to identify potentially sensitive informa‐
tion, such as determining if a string resembles a valid home address. If a query is
found to contain sensitive information, you have two options: block the entire query
or remove the sensitive information from it. For instance, you can mask a user’s
phone number with the placeholder [PHONE NUMBER]. If the generated response
contains this placeholder, use a PII reverse dictionary that maps this placeholder to
the original information so that you can unmask it, as shown in Figure 10-3.

1 An example is when a Samsung employee put Samsung’s proprietary information into ChatGPT, accidentally

leaking the company’s secrets.

452

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

Figure 10-3. An example of masking and unmasking PII information using a reverse
PII map to avoid sending it to external APIs.

Output guardrails
A model can fail in many different ways. Output guardrails have two main functions:
• Catch output failures
• Specify the policy to handle different failure modes
To catch outputs that fail to meet your standards, you need to understand what fail‐
ures look like. The easiest failure to detect is when a model returns an empty
response when it shouldn’t.2 Failures look different for different applications. Here
are some common failures in the two main categories: quality and security. Quality
failures are discussed in Chapter 4, and security failures are discussed in Chapter 5.
I’ll quickly mention a few of these failures as a recap:

2 It’s possible that users ask the model to return an empty response.

AI Engineering Architecture

|

453

• Quality
— Malformatted responses that don’t follow the expected output format. For
example, the application expects JSON, and the model generates invalid
JSON.
— Factually inconsistent responses hallucinated by the model.
— Generally bad responses. For example, you ask the model to write an essay,
and that essay is just bad.
• Security
— Toxic responses that contain racist content, sexual content, or illegal activities.
— Responses that contain private and sensitive information.
— Responses that trigger remote tool and code execution.
— Brand-risk responses that mischaracterize your company or your competitors.
Recall from Chapter 5 that for security measurements, it’s important to track not
only the security failures but also the false refusal rate. It’s possible to have systems
that are too secure, e.g., one that blocks even legitimate requests, interrupting user
workloads and causing user frustration.
Many failures can be mitigated by simple retry logic. AI models are probabilistic,
which means that if you try a query again, you might get a different response. For
example, if the response is empty, try again X times or until you get a nonempty
response. Similarly, if the response is malformatted, try again until the response is
correctly formatted.
This retry policy, however, can incur extra latency and cost. Each retry means
another round of API calls. If the retry is carried out after failure, the user-perceived
latency will double. To reduce latency, you can make calls in parallel. For example,
for each query, instead of waiting for the first query to fail before retrying, you send
this query to the model twice at the same time, get back two responses, and pick the
better one. This increases the number of redundant API calls while keeping latency
manageable.
It’s also common to fall back on humans for tricky requests. For example, you can
transfer the queries that contain specific phrases to human operators. Some teams
use a specialized model to decide when to transfer a conversation to humans. One
team, for instance, transfers a conversation to human operators when their sentiment
analysis model detects anger in users’ messages. Another team transfers a conversa‐
tion after a certain number of turns to prevent users from getting stuck in a loop.

454

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

Guardrail implementation
Guardrails come with trade-offs. One is the reliability versus latency trade-off. While
acknowledging the importance of guardrails, some teams told me that latency is more
important. The teams decided not to implement guardrails because they can signifi‐
cantly increase the application’s latency.3
Output guardrails might not work well in the stream completion mode. By default,
the whole response is generated before being shown to the user, which can take a
long time. In the stream completion mode, new tokens are streamed to the user as
they are generated, reducing the time the user has to wait to see the response. The
downside is that it’s hard to evaluate partial responses, so unsafe responses might be
streamed to users before the system guardrails can determine that they should be
blocked.
How many guardrails you need to implement also depends on whether you self-host
your models or use third-party APIs. While you can implement guardrails on top of
both, third-party APIs can reduce the guardrails you need to implement since API
providers typically provide many guardrails out of the box for you. At the same time,
self-hosting means that you don’t need to send requests externally, which reduces the
need for many types of input guardrails.
Given the many different places where an application might fail, guardrails can be
implemented at many different levels. Model providers give their models guardrails
to make their models better and more secure. However, model providers have to bal‐
ance safety and flexibility. Restrictions might make a model safer but can also make it
less usable for specific use cases.
Guardrails can also implemented by application developers. Many techniques are dis‐
cussed in “Defenses Against Prompt Attacks” on page 248. Guardrail solutions that
you can use out of the box include Meta’s Purple Llama, NVIDIA’s NeMo Guard‐
rails, Azure’s PyRIT, Azure’s AI content filters, the Perspective API, and OpenAI’s
content moderation API. Due to the overlap of risks in inputs and outputs, a guard‐
rail solution will likely provide protection for both inputs and outputs. Some model
gateways also provide guardrail functionalities, as discussed in the next section.
With guardrails, the architecture looks like Figure 10-4. I put scorers under model
APIs since scorers are often AI-powered, even if scorers are typically smaller and
faster than generative models. However, scorers can also be placed in the output
guardrails box.

3 A few early readers told me that the idea of ignoring guardrails in favor of latency gave them nightmares.

AI Engineering Architecture

|

455

Figure 10-4. Application architecture with the addition of input and output guardrails.

Step 3. Add Model Router and Gateway
As applications grow to involve more models, routers and gateways emerge to help
you manage the complexity and costs of serving multiple models.

Router
Instead of using one model for all queries, you can have different solutions for differ‐
ent types of queries. This approach has several benefits. First, it allows specialized
models, which can potentially perform better than a general-purpose model for spe‐
cific queries. For example, you can have one model specialized in technical trouble‐
shooting and another specialized in billing. Second, this can help you save costs.
Instead of using one expensive model for all queries, you can route simpler queries to
cheaper models.
A router typically consists of an intent classifier that predicts what the user is trying
to do. Based on the predicted intent, the query is routed to the appropriate solution.
As an example, consider different intentions relevant to a customer support chatbot:
• If the user wants to reset the password, route them to the FAQ page about recov‐
ering the password.
• If the request is to correct a billing mistake, route it to a human operator.
• If the request is about troubleshooting a technical issue, route it to a chatbot spe‐
cialized in troubleshooting.

456

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

An intent classifier can prevent your system from engaging in out-of-scope conversa‐
tions. If the query is deemed inappropriate, the chatbot can politely decline to
respond using one of the stock responses without wasting an API call. For example, if
the user asks who you would vote for in the upcoming election, a chatbot can
respond with: “As a chatbot, I don’t have the ability to vote. If you have questions
about our products, I’d be happy to help.”
An intent classifier can help the system detect ambiguous queries and ask for clarifi‐
cation. For example, in response to the query “Freezing”, the system might ask, “Do
you want to freeze your account or are you talking about the weather?” or simply ask,
“I’m sorry. Can you elaborate?”
Other routers can aid the model in deciding what to do next. For example, for an
agent capable of multiple actions, a router can take the form of a next-action predic‐
tor: should the model use a code interpreter or a search API next? For a model with a
memory system, a router can predict which part of the memory hierarchy the model
should pull information from. Imagine that a user attaches a document that mentions
Melbourne to the current conversation. Later on, the user asks: “What’s the cutest
animal in Melbourne?” The model needs to decide whether to rely on the informa‐
tion in the attached document or to search the internet for this query.
Intent classifiers and next-action predictors can be implemented on top of founda‐
tion models. Many teams adapt smaller language models like GPT-2, BERT, and
Llama 7B as their intent classifiers. Many teams opt to train even smaller classifiers
from scratch. Routers should be fast and cheap so that they can use multiples of them
without incurring significant extra latency and cost.
When routing queries to models with varying context limits, the query’s context
might need to be adjusted accordingly. Consider a 1,000-token query that is slated for
a model with a 4K context limit. The system then takes an action, e.g., a web search,
that brings back 8,000-token context. You can either truncate the query’s context to
fit the originally intended model or route the query to a model with a larger context
limit.
Because routing is usually done by models, I put routing inside the Model API box in
Figure 10-5. Like scorers, routers are typically smaller than models used for
generation.
Grouping routers together with other models makes models easier to manage.
However, it’s important to note that routing often happens before retrieval. For
example, before retrieval, a router can help determine if a query is in-scope and, if
yes, if it needs retrieval. Routing can happen after retrieval, too, such as determining
if a query should be routed to a human operator. However, routing - retrieval generation - scoring is a much more common AI application pattern.

AI Engineering Architecture

|

457

Figure 10-5. Routing helps the system use the optimal solution for each query.

Gateway
A model gateway is an intermediate layer that allows your organization to interface
with different models in a unified and secure manner. The most basic functionality of
a model gateway is to provide a unified interface to different models, including selfhosted models and models behind commercial APIs. A model gateway makes it eas‐
ier to maintain your code. If a model API changes, you only need to update the
gateway instead of updating all applications that depend on this API. Figure 10-6
shows a high-level visualization of a model gateway.

Figure 10-6. A model gateway provides a unified interface to work with different
models.
458

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

In its simplest form, a model gateway is a unified wrapper. The following code exam‐
ple gives you an idea of how a model gateway might be implemented. It’s not meant
to be functional, as it doesn’t contain any error checking or optimization:
import google.generativeai as genai
import openai
def openai_model(input_data, model_name, max_tokens):
openai.api_key = os.environ["OPENAI_API_KEY"]
response = openai.Completion.create(
engine=model_name,
prompt=input_data,
max_tokens=max_tokens
)
return {"response": response.choices[0].text.strip()}
def gemini_model(input_data, model_name, max_tokens):
genai.configure(api_key=os.environ["GOOGLE_API_KEY"])
model = genai.GenerativeModel(model_name=model_name)
response = model.generate_content(input_data, max_tokens=max_tokens)
return {"response": response["choices"][0]["message"]["content"]}
@app.route('/model', methods=['POST'])
def model_gateway():
data = request.get_json()
model_type = data.get("model_type")
model_name = data.get("model_name")
input_data = data.get("input_data")
max_tokens = data.get("max_tokens")
if model_type == "openai":
result = openai_model(input_data, model_name, max_tokens)
elif model_type == "gemini":
result = gemini_model(input_data, model_name, max_tokens)
return jsonify(result)

A model gateway provides access control and cost management. Instead of giving
everyone who wants access to the OpenAI API your organizational tokens, which can
be easily leaked, you give people access only to the model gateway, creating a central‐
ized and controlled point of access. The gateway can also implement fine-grained
access controls, specifying which user or application should have access to which
model. Moreover, the gateway can monitor and limit the usage of API calls, prevent‐
ing abuse and managing costs effectively.
A model gateway can also be used to implement fallback policies to overcome rate
limits or API failures (the latter is unfortunately common). When the primary API is
unavailable, the gateway can route requests to alternative models, retry after a short
wait, or handle failures gracefully in other ways. This ensures that your application
can operate smoothly without interruptions.

AI Engineering Architecture

|

459

Since requests and responses are already flowing through the gateway, it’s a good
place to implement other functionalities, such as load balancing, logging, and analyt‐
ics. Some gateways even provide caching and guardrails.
Given that gateways are relatively straightforward to implement, there are many offthe-shelf gateways. Examples include Portkey’s AI Gateway, MLflow AI Gateway,
Wealthsimple’s LLM Gateway, TrueFoundry, Kong, and Cloudflare.
In our architecture, the gateway now replaces the model API box, as shown in
Figure 10-7.

Figure 10-7. The architecture with the added routing and gateway modules.
A similar abstraction layer, such as a tool gateway, can also be use‐
ful for accessing a wide range of tools. It’s not discussed in this
book since it’s not a common pattern as of this writing.

Step 4. Reduce Latency with Caches
Caching has long been integral to software applications to reduce latency and cost.
Many ideas from software caching can be used for AI applications. Inference caching
techniques, including KV caching and prompt caching, are discussed in Chapter 9.
This section focuses on system caching. Because caching is an old technology with a
large amount of existing literature, this book will cover it only in broad strokes. In
general, there are two major system caching mechanisms: exact caching and semantic
caching.
460

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

Exact caching
With exact caching, cached items are used only when these exact items are requested.
For example, if a user asks a model to summarize a product, the system checks the
cache to see if a summary of this exact product exists. If yes, fetch this summary. If
not, summarize the product and cache the summary.
Exact caching is also used for embedding-based retrieval to avoid redundant vector
search. If an incoming query is already in the vector search cache, fetch the cached
result. If not, perform a vector search for this query and cache the result.
Caching is especially appealing for queries that involve multiple steps (e.g., chain-ofthought) and/or time-consuming actions (e.g., retrieval, SQL execution, or web
search).
An exact cache can be implemented using in-memory storage for fast retrieval. How‐
ever, since in-memory storage is limited, a cache can also be implemented using data‐
bases like PostgreSQL, Redis, or tiered storage to balance speed and storage capacity.
Having an eviction policy is crucial to manage the cache size and maintain perfor‐
mance. Common eviction policies include Least Recently Used (LRU), Least Fre‐
quently Used (LFU), and first in, first out (FIFO).
How long to keep a query in the cache depends on how likely this query is to be
called again. User-specific queries, such as “What’s the status of my recent order?”,
are less likely to be reused by other users and, therefore, shouldn’t be cached. Simi‐
larly, it makes less sense to cache time-sensitive queries such as “How’s the weather?”
Many teams train a classifier to predict whether a query should be cached.
Caching, when not properly handled, can cause data leaks. Imagine
you work for an ecommerce site, and user X asks a seemingly
generic question such as: “What is the return policy for electronics
products?” Because your return policy depends on the user’s mem‐
bership, the system first retrieves user X’s information and then
generates a response containing X’s information. Mistaking this
query for a generic question, the system caches the answer. Later,
when user Y asks the same question, the cached result is returned,
revealing X’s information to Y.

Semantic caching
Unlike in exact caching, cached items are used even if they are only semantically sim‐
ilar, not identical, to the incoming query. Imagine one user asks, “What’s the capital
of Vietnam?” and the model answers, “Hanoi”. Later, another user asks, “What’s the
capital city of Vietnam?”, which is semantically the same question but with slightly
different wording. With semantic caching, the system can reuse the answer from the
first query instead of computing the new query from scratch. Reusing similar queries
AI Engineering Architecture

|

461

increases the cache’s hit rate and potentially reduces cost. However, semantic caching
can reduce your model’s performance.
Semantic caching works only if you have a reliable way of determining if two queries
are similar. One common approach is to use semantic similarity, as discussed in
Chapter 3. As a refresh, semantic similarity works as follows:
1. For each query, generate its embedding using an embedding model.
2. Use vector search to find the cached embedding with the highest similar score to
the current query embedding. Let’s say this similarity score is X.
3. If X is higher than a certain similarity threshold, the cached query is considered
similar, and the cached results are returned. If not, process this current query and
cache it together with its embedding and results.
This approach requires a vector database to store the embeddings of cached queries.
Compared to other caching techniques, semantic caching’s value is more dubious
because many of its components are prone to failure. Its success relies on high-quality
embeddings, functional vector search, and a reliable similarity metric. Setting the
right similarity threshold can also be tricky, requiring a lot of trial and error. If the
system mistakes the incoming query for one similar to another query, the returned
response, fetched from the cache, will be incorrect.
In addition, semantic cache can be time-consuming and compute-intensive, as it
involves a vector search. The speed and cost of this vector search depend on the size
of your cached embeddings.
Semantic cache might still be worthwhile if the cache hit rate is high, meaning that a
good portion of queries can be effectively answered by leveraging the cached results.
However, before incorporating the complexities of a semantic cache, make sure to
evaluate the associated efficiency, cost, and performance risks.

462

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

With the added cache systems, the platform looks like Figure 10-8. A KV cache and
prompt cache are typically implemented by model API providers, so they aren’t
shown in this image. To visualize them, I’d put them in the Model API box. There’s a
new arrow to add generated responses to the cache.

Figure 10-8. An AI application architecture with the added caches.

Step 5. Add Agent Patterns
The applications discussed so far are still fairly simple. Each query follows a sequen‐
tial flow. However, as discussed in Chapter 6, an application flow can be more com‐
plex with loops, parallel execution, and conditional branching. Agentic patterns,
discussed in Chapter 6, can help you build complex applications. For example, after
the system generates an output, it might determine that it hasn’t accomplished the
task and that it needs to perform another retrieval to gather more information. The
original response, together with the newly retrieved context, is passed into the same
model or a different one. This creates a loop, as shown in Figure 10-9.

AI Engineering Architecture

|

463

Figure 10-9. The yellow arrow allows the generated response to be fed back into the sys‐
tem, allowing more complex application patterns.
A model’s outputs also can be used to invoke write actions, such as composing an
email, placing an order, or initializing a bank transfer. Write actions allow a system to
make changes to its environment directly. As discussed in Chapter 6, write actions
can make a system vastly more capable but also expose it to significantly more risks.
Giving a model access to write actions should be done with the utmost care. With
added write actions, the architecture looks like Figure 10-10.
If you’ve followed all the steps so far, your architecture has likely grown quite com‐
plex. While complex systems can solve more tasks, they also introduce more failure
modes, making them harder to debug due to the many potential points of failure. The
next section will cover best practices for improving system observability.

464

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

Figure 10-10. An application architecture that enables the system to perform write
actions.

Monitoring and Observability
Even though I put observability in its own section, observability should be integral to
the design of a product, rather than an afterthought. The more complex a product,
the more crucial observability is.
Observability is a universal practice across all software engineering disciplines. It’s a
big industry with established best practices and many ready-to-use proprietary and
open source solutions.4 To avoid reinventing the wheel, I’ll focus on what’s unique to
applications built on top of foundation models. The book’s GitHub repository con‐
tains resources for those who want to learn more about observability.5

4 As of this writing, the aggregated market capitalization of a few of the largest observability companies (Data‐

dog, Splunk, Dynatrace, New Relic) is close to $100 billion.

5 My book, Designing Machine Learning Systems (O’Reilly, 2022), also has a chapter on monitoring. An early

draft of the chapter is available on my blog at “Data Distribution Shifts and Monitoring”.

AI Engineering Architecture

|

465

The goal of monitoring is the same as the goal of evaluation: to mitigate risks and
discover opportunities. Risks that monitoring should help you mitigate include appli‐
cation failures, security attacks, and drifts. Monitoring can help discover opportuni‐
ties for application improvement and cost savings. Monitoring can also help keep you
accountable by giving visibility into your system’s performance.
Three metrics can help evaluate the quality of your system’s observability, derived
from the DevOps community:
• MTTD (mean time to detection): When something bad happens, how long does
it take to detect it?
• MTTR (mean time to response): After detection, how long does it take to be
resolved?
• CFR (change failure rate): The percentage of changes or deployments that result
in failures requiring fixes or rollbacks. If you don’t know your CFR, it’s time to
redesign your platform to make it more observable.
Having a high CFR doesn’t necessarily indicate a bad monitoring system. However,
you should rethink your evaluation pipeline so that bad changes are caught before
being deployed. Evaluation and monitoring need to work closely together. Evaluation
metrics should translate well to monitoring metrics, meaning that a model that does
well during evaluation should also do well during monitoring. Issues detected during
monitoring should be fed to the evaluation pipeline.

Monitoring Versus Observability
Since the mid-2010s, the industry has embraced the term “observability” instead of
“monitoring.” Monitoring makes no assumption about the relationship between the
internal state of a system and its outputs. You monitor the external outputs of the sys‐
tem to figure out when something goes wrong inside the system—there’s no guaran‐
tee that the external outputs will help you figure out what goes wrong.
Observability, on the other hand, makes an assumption stronger than traditional
monitoring: that a system’s internal states can be inferred from knowledge of its
external outputs. When something goes wrong with an observable system, we should
be able to figure out what went wrong by looking at the system’s logs and metrics
without having to ship new code to the system. Observability is about instrumenting
your system in a way that ensures that sufficient information about a system’s run‐
time is collected and analyzed so that when something goes wrong, it can help you
figure out what goes wrong.

466

| Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

In this book, I’ll use the term “monitoring” to refer to the act of tracking a system’s
information and “observability” to refer to the whole process of instrumentating,
tracking, and debugging the system.

Metrics
When discussing monitoring, most people think of metrics. However, metrics them‐
selves aren’t the goal. Frankly, most companies don’t care what your application’s
output relevancy score is unless it serves a purpose. The purpose of a metric is to tell
you when something is wrong and to identify opportunities for improvement.
Before listing what metrics to track, it’s important to understand what failure modes
you want to catch and design your metrics around these failures. For example, if you
don’t want your application to hallucinate, design metrics that help you detect hallu‐
cinations. One relevant metric might be whether an application’s output can be infer‐
red from the context. If you don’t want your application to burn through your API
credit, track metrics related to API costs, such as the number of input and output
tokens per request or your cache’s cost and your cache’s hit rate.
Because foundation models can generate open-ended outputs, there are many ways
things can go wrong. Metrics design requires analytical thinking, statistical knowl‐
edge, and, often, creativity. Which metrics you should track are highly applicationspecific.
This book has covered many different types of model quality metrics (Chapters 4–6,
and later in this chapter) and many different ways to compute them (Chapters 3 and
5). Here, I’ll do a quick recap.
The easiest types of failures to track are format failures because they are easy to notice
and verify. For example, if you expect JSON outputs, track how often the model out‐
puts invalid JSON and, among these invalid JSON outputs, how many can be easily
fixed (missing a closing bracket is easy to fix, but missing expected keys is harder).
For open-ended generations, consider monitoring factual consistency and relevant
generation quality metrics such as conciseness, creativity, or positivity. Many of these
metrics can be computed using AI judges.
If safety is an issue, you can track toxicity-related metrics and detect private and sen‐
sitive information in both inputs and outputs. Track how often your guardrails get
triggered and how often your system refuses to answer. Detect abnormal queries to
your system, too, since they might reveal interesting edge cases or prompt attacks.

AI Engineering Architecture

|

467

Model quality can also be inferred through user natural language feedback and con‐
versational signals. For example, some easy metrics you can track include the
following:
• How often do users stop a generation halfway?
• What’s the average number of turns per conversation?
• What’s the average number of tokens per input? Are users using your application
for more complex tasks, or are they learning to be more concise with their
prompts?
• What’s the average number of tokens per output? Are some models more ver‐
bose than others? Are certain types of queries more likely to result in lengthy
answers?
• What’s the model’s output token distribution? How has it changed over time? Is
the model getting more or less diverse?
Length-related metrics are also important for tracking latency and costs, as longer
contexts and responses typically increase latency and incur higher costs.
Each component in an application pipeline has its own metrics. For example, in a
RAG application, the retrieval quality is often evaluated using context relevance and
context precision. A vector database can be evaluated by how much storage it needs
to index the data and how long it takes to query the data.
Given that you’ll likely have multiple metrics, it’s useful to measure how these met‐
rics correlate to each other and, especially, to your business north star metrics, which
can be DAU (daily active user), session duration (the length of time a user spends
actively engaged with the application), or subscriptions. Metrics that are strongly cor‐
related to your north star might give you ideas on how to improve your north star.
Metrics that are not at all correlated might also give you ideas on what not to opti‐
mize for.
Tracking latency is essential for understanding the user experience. Common latency
metrics, as discussed in Chapter 9, include:
• Time to first token (TTFT): the time it takes for the first token to be generated.
• Time per output token (TPOT): the time it takes to generate each output token.
• Total latency: the total time required to complete a response.
Track all these metrics per user to see how your system scales with more users.

468

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

You’ll also want to track costs. Cost-related metrics are the number of queries and the
volume of input and output tokens, such as tokens per second (TPS). If you use an
API with rate limits, tracking the number of requests per second is important to
ensure you stay within your allocated limits and avoid potential service interruptions.
When calculating metrics, you can choose between spot checks and exhaustive
checks. Spot checks involve sampling a subset of data to quickly identify issues, while
exhaustive checks evaluate every request for a comprehensive performance view. The
choice depends on your system’s requirements and available resources, with a combi‐
nation of both providing a balanced monitoring strategy.
When computing metrics, ensure they can be broken down by relevant axes, such as
users, releases, prompt/chain versions, prompt/chain types, and time. This granular‐
ity helps in understanding performance variations and identifying specific issues.

Logs and traces
Metrics are typically aggregated. They condense information from events that occur
in your system over time. They help you understand, at a glance, how your system is
doing. However, there are many questions that metrics can’t help you answer. For
example, after seeing a spike in a specific activity, you might wonder: “Has this hap‐
pened before?” Logs can help you answer this question.
If metrics are numerical measurements representing attributes and events, logs are an
append-only record of events. In production, a debugging process might look like
this:
1. Metrics tell you something went wrong five minutes ago, but they don’t tell you
what happened.
2. You look at the logs of events that took place around five minutes ago to figure
out what happened.
3. Correlate the errors in the logs to the metrics to make sure that you’ve identified
the right issue.
For fast detection, metrics need to be computed quickly. For fast response, logs need
to be readily available and accessible. If your logs are 15 minutes delayed, you will
have to wait for the logs to arrive to track down an issue that happened 5 minutes
ago.

AI Engineering Architecture

|

469

Because you don’t know exactly what logs you’ll need to look at in the future, the
general rule for logging is to log everything. Log all the configurations, including the
model API endpoint, model name, sampling settings (temperature, top-p, top-k,
stopping condition, etc.), and the prompt template.
Log the user query, the final prompt sent to the model, the output, and the inter‐
mediate outputs. Log if it calls any tool. Log the tool outputs. Log when a component
starts, ends, when something crashes, etc. When recording a piece of log, make sure
to give it tags and IDs that can help you know where this log comes from in the
system.
Logging everything means that the amount of logs you have can grow very quickly.
Many tools for automated log analysis and log anomaly detection are powered by AI.
While it’s impossible to process logs manually, it’s useful to manually inspect your
production data daily to get a sense of how users are using your application. Shankar
et al., (2024) found that the developers’ perceptions of what constitutes good and bad
outputs change as they interact with more data, allowing them to both rewrite their
prompts to increase the chance of good responses and update their evaluation pipe‐
line to catch bad responses.
If logs are a series of disjointed events, traces are reconstructed by linking related
events together to form a complete timeline of a transaction or process, showing how
each step connects from start to finish. In short, a trace is the detailed recording of a
request’s execution path through various system components and services. In an AI
application, tracing reveals the entire process from when a user sends a query to
when the final response is returned, including the actions the system takes, the docu‐
ments retrieved, and the final prompt sent to the model. It should also show how
much time each step takes and its associated cost, if measurable. Figure 10-11 is a vis‐
ualization of a request’s trace in LangSmith.
Ideally, you should be able to trace each query’s transformation step-by-step through
the system. If a query fails, you should be able to pinpoint the exact step where it
went wrong: whether it was incorrectly processed, the retrieved context was irrele‐
vant, or the model generated a wrong response.

470

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

Figure 10-11. A request trace visualized by LangSmith.

Drift detection
The more parts a system has, the more things that can change. In an AI application
these can be:
System prompt changes
There are many reasons why your application’s system prompt might change
without your knowing. The system prompt could’ve been built on top of a
prompt template, and that prompt template was updated. A coworker could’ve

AI Engineering Architecture

|

471

found a typo and fixed it. A simple logic should be sufficient to catch when your
application’s system prompt changes.
User behavior changes
Over time, users adapt their behaviors to the technology. For example, people
have already figured out how to frame their queries to get better results on Goo‐
gle Search or how to make their articles rank higher on search results. People liv‐
ing in areas with self-driving cars have already figured out how to bully selfdriving cars into giving them the right of way (Liu et al., 2020). It’s likely that
your users will change their behaviors to get better results out of your applica‐
tion. For example, your users might learn to write instructions to make the
responses more concise. This might cause a gradual drop in response length over
time. If you look only at metrics, it might not be obvious what caused this grad‐
ual drop. You need investigations to understand the root cause.
Underlying model changes
When using a model through an API, it’s possible that the API remains
unchanged while the underlying model is updated. As mentioned in Chapter 4,
model providers might not always disclose these updates, leaving it to you to
detect any changes. Different versions of the same API can have a significant
impact on performance. For instance, Chen et al. (2023) observed notable differ‐
ences in benchmark scores between the March 2023 and June 2023 versions of
GPT-4 and GPT-3.5. Likewise, Voiceflow reported a 10% performance drop
when switching from the older GPT-3.5-turbo-0301 to the newer GPT-3.5turbo-1106.

AI Pipeline Orchestration
An AI application can get fairly complex, consisting of multiple models, retrieving
data from many databases, and having access to a wide range of tools. An orchestra‐
tor helps you specify how these different components work together to create an endto-end pipeline. It ensures that data flows seamlessly between components. At a high
level, an orchestrator operates in two steps, components definition and chaining:
Components definition
You need to tell the orchestrator what components your system uses, including
different models, external data sources for retrieval, and tools that your system
can use. A model gateway can make it easier to add a model.6 You can also tell
the orchestrator if you use any tools for evaluation and monitoring.

6 Because of this, some orchestrator tools want to be gateways. In fact, so many tools seem to want to become

end-to-end platforms that do everything.

472

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

Chaining
Chaining is basically function composition: it combines different functions
(components) together. In chaining (pipelining), you tell the orchestrator the
steps your system takes from receiving the user query until completing the task.
Here’s an example of the steps:
1. Process the raw query.
2. Retrieve the relevant data based on the processed query.
3. Combine the original query and the retrieved data to create a prompt in the
format expected by the model.
4. The model generates a response based on the prompt.
5. Evaluate the response.
6. If the response is considered good, return it to the user. If not, route the
query to a human operator.
The orchestrator is responsible for passing data between components. It should pro‐
vide toolings that help ensure that the output from the current step is in the format
expected by the next step. Ideally, it should notify you when this data flow is disrup‐
ted due to errors such as component failures or data mismatch failures.
An AI pipeline orchestrator is different from a general workflow
orchestrator, like Airflow or Metaflow.

When designing the pipeline for an application with strict latency requirements, try
to do as much in parallel as possible. For example, if you have a routing component
(deciding where to send a query) and a PII removal component, both can be done at
the same time.
There are many AI orchestration tools, including LangChain, LlamaIndex, Flowise,
Langflow, and Haystack. Because retrieval and tool use are common application pat‐
terns, many RAG and agent frameworks are also orchestration tools.
While it’s tempting to jump straight to an orchestration tool when starting a project,
you might want to start building your application without one first. Any external tool
brings additional complexity. An orchestrator can abstract away critical details of
how your system works, making it hard to understand and debug your system.

AI Engineering Architecture

|

473

As you advance to the later stages of your application development process, you
might decide that an orchestrator can make your life easier. Here are three aspects to
keep in mind when evaluating orchestrators:
Integration and extensibility
Evaluate whether the orchestrator supports the components you’re already using
or might adopt in the future. For example, if you want to use a Llama model,
check if the orchestrator supports that. Given how many models, databases, and
frameworks there are, it’s impossible for an orchestrator to support everything.
Therefore, you’ll also need to consider an orchestrator’s extensibility. If it doesn’t
support a specific component, how hard is it to change that?
Support for complex pipelines
As your applications grow in complexity, you might need to manage intricate
pipelines involving multiple steps and conditional logic. An orchestrator that
supports advanced features like branching, parallel processing, and error han‐
dling will help you manage these complexities efficiently.
Ease of use, performance, and scalability
Consider the user-friendliness of the orchestrator. Look for intuitive APIs, com‐
prehensive documentation, and strong community support, as these can signifi‐
cantly reduce the learning curve for you and your team. Avoid orchestrators that
initiate hidden API calls or introduce latency to your applications. Additionally,
ensure that the orchestrator can scale effectively as the number of applications,
developers, and traffic grows.

User Feedback
User feedback has always played a critical role in software applications in two key
ways: evaluating the application’s performance and informing its development. How‐
ever, in AI applications, user feedback takes on an even more significant role. User
feedback is proprietary data, and data is a competitive advantage. A well-designed
user feedback system is necessary to create the data flywheel discussed in Chapter 8.7
User feedback can be used not only to personalize models for individual users but
also to train future iterations of the models. As data becomes increasingly scarce, pro‐
prietary data is more valuable than ever. A product that launches quickly and attracts
users early can gather data to continually improve models, making it difficult for
competitors to catch up.

7 One key disadvantage of launching an open source application instead of a commercial application is that it’s

a lot harder to collect user feedback. Users can take your open source application and deploy it themselves,
and you have no idea how the application is used.

474

| Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

It’s important to remember that user feedback is user data. Leveraging user feedback
requires the same cautions needed when leveraging any data. User privacy should be
respected. Users have the right to know how their data is being used.

Extracting Conversational Feedback
Traditionally, feedback can be explicit or implicit. Explicit feedback is information
users provide in response to explicit requests for feedback in the application, such as
thumbs up/thumbs down, upvote/downvote, star rating, or a yes/no answer to the
question “Did we solve your problem?” Explicit feedback is fairly standard across
applications—there are only so many ways you can ask a person if they like some‐
thing. Therefore, explicit feedback is better understood.
Implicit feedback is information inferred from user actions. For example, if someone
buys a product recommended to them, it means it was a good recommendation.
What can be considered implicit feedback depends on what actions a user can do
within each application and is, therefore, highly application-dependent. Foundation
models enable a new world of applications and, with them, many genres of implicit
feedback.
The conversational interface that many AI applications use makes it easier for users
to give feedback. Users can encourage good behaviors and correct errors the same
way they would give feedback in daily dialogues. The language that a user uses to give
directions to AI can convey feedback about both the application’s performance and
the user’s preference.
As an example, imagine you’re using an AI assistant to help you plan your trip to
Australia. You ask the AI to find a hotel for three nights in Sydney. It responds with
three recommendations as follows:
Here are three hotel suggestions in Sydney for a 3-night stay:
1. Historic Rocks Boutique Hotel (The Rocks)

• Price: ~$400/night
• Neighborhood: Charming streets and close to iconic sights.
2. Stylish Surry Hills House Hotel (Surry Hills)

• Price: ~$200/night
• Neighborhood: Trendy, with vibrant cafes and art galleries.
3. Chill Bondi Beachside Hotel (Bondi Beach)

• Price: ~$300/night
• Neighborhood: Beachside, ideal for relaxation and city exploration.

User Feedback

|

475

How you respond to these three recommendations reveals your preference. For
example, if you respond with “Yes book me the one close to galleries”, you show an
interest in art. On the other hand, the response “Is there nothing under $200?”
reveals a price-conscious preference and suggests that the assistant doesn’t quite get
you yet.
User feedback, extracted from conversations, can be used for evaluation, develop‐
ment, and personalization:
• Evaluation: derive metrics to monitor the application
• Development: train the future models or guide their development
• Personalization: personalize the application to each user
Implicit conversational feedback can be inferred from both the content of user mes‐
sages and their patterns of communication. Because feedback is blended into daily
conversations, it’s also challenging to extract. While intuition about conversational
cues can help you devise an initial set of signals to look for, rigorous data analysis and
user studies are necessary to understand.
While conversational feedback has enjoyed greater attention thanks to the popularity
of conversational bots, it had been an active research area for several years before
ChatGPT came out. The reinforcement learning community has been trying to get
RL algorithms to learn from natural language feedback since the late 2010s, many of
them with promising results; see Fu et al. (2019); Goyal et al. (2019); Zhou and Small
(2020); and Sumers et al. (2020)). Natural language feedback is also of great interest
for early conversational AI applications such as Amazon Alexa (Ponnusamy et al.,
2019; Park et al., 2020), Spotify’s voice control feature (Xiao et al., 2021), and Yahoo!
Voice (Hashimoto and Sassano, 2018).

Natural language feedback
Feedback extracted from the content of messages is called natural language feedback.
Here are a couple of natural language feedback signals that tell you how a conversa‐
tion is going. It’s useful to track these signals in production to monitor your applica‐
tion’s performance.

Early termination. If a user terminates a response early, e.g., stopping a response gen‐

eration halfway, exiting the app (for web and mobile apps), telling the model to stop
(for voice assistants), or simply leaving the agent hanging (e.g., not responding to the
agent with which option you want it to go ahead with), it’s likely that the conversa‐
tion isn’t going well.

476

| Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

Error correction. If a user starts their follow-up with “No, …” or “I meant, …”, the
model’s response is likely off the mark.
To correct errors, users might try to rephrase their requests. Figure 10-12 shows an
example of a user’s attempt to correct the model’s misunderstanding. Rephrase
attempts can be detected using heuristics or ML models.

Figure 10-12. Because the user both terminates the generation early and rephrases the
question, it can be inferred that the model misunderstood the intent of the original
request.
Users can also point out specific things the model should’ve done differently. For
example, if a user asks the model to summarize a story and the model confuses a
character, this user can give feedback such as: “Bill is the suspect, not the victim.” The
model should be able to take this feedback and revise the summary.
This kind of action-correcting feedback is especially common for agentic use cases
where users might nudge the agent toward more optional actions. For example, if a
user assigns the agent the task of doing market analysis about company XYZ, this
user might give feedback such as “You should also check XYZ GitHub page” or
“Check the CEO’s X profile”.
Sometimes, users might want the model to correct itself by asking for explicit confir‐
mation, such as “Are you sure?”, “Check again”, or “Show me the sources”. This
doesn’t necessarily mean that the model gives wrong answers. However, it might

User Feedback

|

477

mean that your model’s answers lack the details the user is looking for. It can also
indicate general distrust in your model.
Some applications let users edit the model’s responses directly. For example, if a user
asks the model to generate code, and the user corrects the generated code, it’s a very
strong signal that the code that got edited isn’t quite right.
User edits also serve as a valuable source of preference data. Recall that preference
data, typically in the format of (query, winning response, losing response), can be
used to align a model to human preference. Each user edit makes up a preference
example, with the original generated response being the losing response and the
edited response being the winning response.

Complaints. Often, users just complain about your application’s outputs without try‐

ing to correct them. For example, they might complain that an answer is wrong, irrel‐
evant, toxic, lengthy, lacking detail, or just bad. Table 10-1 shows eight groups of
natural language feedback resulting from automatic clustering the FITS (Feedback
for Interactive Talk & Search) dataset (Xu et al., 2022).
Table 10-1. Feedback types derived from automatic clustering the FITS dataset (Xu et al.,
2022). Results from Yuan et al. (2023).
Group Feedback type
1
Clarify their demand again.
2
Complain that the bot (1) does not answer the question or (2) gives irrelevant information or (3)
asks the user to find out the answer on their own.
3
Point out specific search results that can answer the question.
4
Suggest that the bot should use the search results.
5
State that the answer is (1) factually incorrect, or (2) not grounded in the search results.
6
Point out that the bot’s answer is not specific/accurate/complete/detailed.
7
Point out that the bot is not confident in its answers and always begins its responses with “I am
not sure” or “I don’t know”.
8
Complain about repetition/rudeness in bot responses.

Num. %
3702 26.54%
2260 16.20%
2255
2130
1572
1309
582

16.17%
15.27%
11.27%
9.39%
4.17%

137

0.99%

Understanding how the bot fails the user is crucial in making it better. For example, if
you know that the user doesn’t like verbose answers, you can change the bot’s prompt
to make it more concise. If the user is unhappy because the answer lacks details, you
can prompt the bot to be more specific.

Sentiment. Complaints can also be general expressions of negative sentiments (frus‐

tration, disappointment, ridicule, etc.) without explaining the reason why, such as
“Uggh”. This might sound dystopian, but analysis of a user’s sentiments throughout
conversations with a bot might give you insights into how the bot is doing. Some call
centers track users’ voices throughout the calls. If a user gets increasingly loud,

478

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

something is wrong. Conversely, if someone starts a conversation angry but ends
happily, the conversation might have resolved their issue.
Natural language feedback can also be inferred from the model’s responses. One
important signal is the model’s refusal rate. If a model says things like “Sorry, I don’t
know that one” or “As a language model, I can’t do …”, the user is probably
unhappy.

Other conversational feedback
Other types of conversational feedback can be derived from user actions instead of
messages.

Regeneration. Many applications let users generate another response, sometimes

with a different model. If a user chooses regeneration, it might be because they’re not
satisfied with the first response. However, it might also be that the first response is
adequate, but the user wants options to compare. This is especially common with cre‐
ative requests like image or story generation.

Regeneration signals might also be stronger for applications with usage-based billing
than those with subscriptions. With usage-based billing, users are less likely to regen‐
erate and spend extra money out of idle curiosity.
Personally, I often choose regeneration for complex requests to ensure the model’s
responses are consistent. If two responses give contradicting answers, I can’t trust
either.
After regeneration, some applications might explicitly ask to compare the new
response with the previous one, as shown in Figure 10-13. This better or worse data,
again, can be used for preference finetuning.

Figure 10-13. ChatGPT asks for comparative feedback when a user regenerates another
response.

Conversation organization. The actions a user takes to organize their conversations—

such as delete, rename, share, and bookmark—can also be signals. Deleting a conver‐
sation is a pretty strong signal that the conversation is bad, unless it’s an embarrass‐
ing conversation and the user wants to remove its trace. Renaming a conversation
suggests that the conversation is good, but the auto-generated title is bad.

User Feedback

|

479

Conversation length. Another commonly tracked signal is the number of turns per
conversation. Whether this is a positive or negative signal depends on the application.
For AI companions, a long conversation might indicate that the user enjoys the con‐
versation. However, for chatbots geared toward productivity like customer support, a
long conversation might indicate that the bot is inefficient in helping users resolve
their issues.
Dialogue diversity. Conversation length can also be interpreted together with dialogue

diversity, which can be measured by the distinct token or topic count. For example, if
the conversation is long but the bot keeps repeating a few lines, the user might be
stuck in a loop.

Explicit feedback is easier to interpret, but it demands extra effort from users. Since
many users may not be willing to put in this additional work, explicit feedback can be
sparse, especially in applications with smaller user bases. Explicit feedback also suf‐
fers from response biases. For example, unhappy users might be more likely to com‐
plain, causing the feedback to appear more negative than it is.
Implicit feedback is more abundant—what can be considered implicit feedback is
limited only by your imagination—but it’s noisier. Interpreting implicit signals can
be challenging. For example, sharing a conversation can either be a negative or a pos‐
itive signal. For example, one friend of mine mostly shares conversations when the
model has made some glaring mistakes, and another friend mostly shares useful con‐
versations with their coworkers. It’s important to study your users to understand why
they do each action.
Adding more signals can help clarify the intent. For example, if the user rephrases
their question after sharing a link, it might indicate that the conversation didn’t meet
their expectations. Extracting, interpreting, and leveraging implicit responses from
conversations is a small but growing area of research.8

Feedback Design
If you were unsure of what feedback to collect, I hope that the last section gave you
some ideas.
This section discusses when and how to collect this valuable feedback.

8 Not only can you collect feedback about AI applications, you can use AI to analyze feedback, too.

480

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

When to collect feedback
Feedback can and should be collected throughout the user journey. Users should
have the option to give feedback, especially to report errors, whenever this need ari‐
ses. The feedback collection option, however, should be nonintrusive. It shouldn’t
interfere with the user workflow. Here are a few places where user feedback might be
particularly valuable.

In the beginning. When a user has just signed up, user feedback can help calibrate the

application for the user. For example, a face ID app first must scan your face to work.
A voice assistant might ask you to read a sentence out loud to recognize your voice
for wake words (words that activate a voice assistant, like “Hey Google”). A language
learning app might ask you a few questions to gauge your skill level. For some appli‐
cations, such as face ID, calibration is necessary. For other applications, however, ini‐
tial feedback should be optional, as it creates friction for users to try out your
product. If a user doesn’t specify their preference, you can fall back to a neutral
option and calibrate over time.

When something bad happens. When the model hallucinates a response, blocks a legit‐
imate request, generates a compromising image, or takes too long to respond, users
should be able to notify you of these failures. You can give users the option to down‐
vote a response, regenerate with the same model, or change to another model. Users
might just give conversational feedback like “You’re wrong”, “Too cliche”, or “I want
something shorter”.
Ideally, when your product makes mistakes, users should still be able to accomplish
their tasks. For example, if the model wrongly categorizes a product, users can edit
the category. Let users collaborate with the AI. If that doesn’t work, let them collabo‐
rate with humans. Many customer support bots offer to transfer users to human
agents if the conversation drags on or if users seem frustrated.
An example of human–AI collaboration is the inpainting functionality for image gen‐
eration.9 If a generated image isn’t exactly what the user needs, they can select a
region of the image and describe with a prompt how to make it better. Figure 10-14
shows an example of inpainting with DALL-E (OpenAI, 2021). This feature allows
users to get better results while giving developers high-quality feedback.

9 I wish there were inpainting for text-to-speech. I find text-to-speech works well 95% of the time, but the other

5% can be frustrating. AI might mispronounce a name or fail to pause during dialogues. I wish there were
apps that let me edit just the mistakes instead of having to regenerate the whole audio.

User Feedback

|

481

Figure 10-14. An example of how inpainting works in DALL-E. Image by OpenAI.

482

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

When the model has low confidence. When a model is uncertain about an action, you

can ask the user for feedback to increase its confidence. For example, given a request
to summarize a paper, if the model is uncertain whether the user would prefer a
short, high-level summary or a detailed section-by-section summary, the model can
output both summaries side by side, assuming that generating two summaries
doesn’t increase the latency for the user. The user can choose which one they prefer.
Comparative signals like this can be used for preference finetuning. An example of
comparative evaluation in production is shown in Figure 10-15.

Figure 10-15. Side-by-side comparison of two ChatGPT responses.
Showing two full responses for the user to choose means asking that user for explicit
feedback. Users might not have time to read two full responses or care enough to give
thoughtful feedback. This can result in noisy votes. Some applications, like Google
Gemini, show only the beginning of each response, as shown in Figure 10-16. Users
can click to expand the response they want to read. It’s unclear, however, whether
showing full or partial responses side by side gives more reliable feedback.10

10 When I ask this question at events I speak at, the responses are conflicted. Some people think showing full

responses gives more reliable feedback because it gives users more information to make a decision. At the
same time, some people think that once users have read full responses, there’s no incentive for them to click
on the better one.

User Feedback

|

483

Figure 10-16. Google Gemini shows partial responses side by side for comparative feed‐
back. Users have to click on the response they want to read more about, which gives
feedback about which response they find more promising.
Another example is a photo organization application that automatically tags your
photos, so that it can respond to queries like “Show me all the photos of X”. When
unsure if two people are the same, it can ask you for feedback, as Google Photos does
in Figure 10-17.

Figure 10-17. Google Photos asks for user feedback when unsure. The two cat images
were generated by ChatGPT.
You might wonder: how about feedback when something good happens? Actions
that users can take to express their satisfaction include thumbs up, favoriting, or
sharing. However, Apple’s human interface guideline warns against asking for both
positive and negative feedback. Your application should produce good results by
default. Asking for feedback on good results might give users the impression that
good results are exceptions. Ultimately, if users are happy, they continue using your
application.

484

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

However, many people I’ve talked to believe users should have the option to give
feedback when they encounter something amazing. A product manager for a popular
AI-powered product mentioned that their team needs positive feedback because it
reveals the features users love enough to give enthusiastic feedback about. This allows
the team to concentrate on refining a small set of high-impact features rather than
spreading resources across many with minimal added value.
Some avoid asking for positive feedback out of concern it may clutter the interface or
annoy users. However, this risk can be managed by limiting the frequency of feed‐
back requests. For example, if you have a large user base, showing the request to only
1% of users at a time could help gather sufficient feedback without disrupting the
experience for most users. Keep in mind that the smaller the percentage of users
asked, the greater the risk of feedback biases. Still, with a large enough pool, the feed‐
back can provide meaningful product insights.

How to collect feedback
Feedback should seamlessly integrate into the user’s workflow. It should be easy for
users to provide feedback without extra work. Feedback collection shouldn’t disrupt
user experience and should be easy to ignore. There should be incentives for users to
give good feedback.
One example often cited as good feedback design is from the image generator app
Midjourney. For each prompt, Midjourney generates a set of (four) images and gives
the user the following options, as shown in Figure 10-18:
1. Generate an unscaled version of any of these images.
2. Generate variations for any of these images.
3. Regenerate.
All these options give Midjourney different signals. Options 1 and 2 tell Midjourney
which of the four photos is considered by the user to be the most promising. Option
1 gives the strongest positive signal about the chosen photo. Option 2 gives a weaker
positive signal. Option 3 signals that none of the photos is good enough. However,
users might choose to regenerate even if the existing photos are good just to see what
else is possible.

User Feedback

|

485

Figure 10-18. Midjourney’s workflow allows the app to collect implicit feedback.
Code assistants like GitHub Copilot might show their drafts in lighter colors than the
final texts, as shown in Figure 10-19. Users can use the Tab key to accept a suggestion
or simply continue typing to ignore the suggestion, both providing feedback.

Figure 10-19. GitHub Copilot makes it easy to both suggest and reject a suggestion.
486

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

One of the biggest challenges of standalone AI applications like ChatGPT and Claude
is that they aren’t integrated into the user’s daily workflow, making it hard to collect
high-quality feedback the way integrated products like GitHub Copilot can. For
example, if Gmail suggests an email draft, Gmail can track how this draft is used or
edited. However, if you use ChatGPT to write an email, ChatGPT doesn’t know
whether the generated email is actually sent.
The feedback alone might be helpful for product analytics. For example, seeing just
the thumbs up/thumbs down information is useful for calculating how often people
are happy or unhappy with your product. For deeper analysis, though, you would
need context around the feedback, such as the previous 5 to 10 dialogue turns. This
context can help you figure out what went wrong. However, getting this context
might not be possible without explicit user consent, especially if the context might
contain personally identifiable information.
For this reason, some products include terms in their service agreements that allow
them to access user data for analytics and product improvement. For applications
without such terms, user feedback might be tied to a user data donation flow, where
users are asked to donate (e.g., share) their recent interaction data along with their
feedback. For example, when submitting feedback, you might be asked to check a box
to share your recent data as context for this feedback.
Explaining to users how their feedback is used can motivate them to give more and
better feedback. Do you use a user’s feedback to personalize the product to this user,
to collect statistics about general usage, or to train a new model? If users are con‐
cerned about privacy, reassure them that their data won’t be used to train models or
won’t leave their device (only if these are true).
Don’t ask users to do the impossible. For example, if you collect comparative signals
from users, don’t ask them to choose between two options they don’t understand. For
example, I was once stumped when ChatGPT asked me to choose between two possi‐
ble answers to a statistical question, as shown in Figure 10-20. I wish there was an
option for me to say, “I don’t know”.

User Feedback

|

487

Figure 10-20. An example of ChatGPT asking a user to select the response the user pre‐
fers. However, for mathematical questions like this, the right answer shouldn’t be a
matter of preference.
Add icons and tooltips to an option if they help people understand it. Avoid a design
that can confuse users. Ambiguous instructions can lead to noisy feedback. I once
hosted a GPU optimization workshop, using Luma to collect feedback. When I was
reading the negative feedback, I was confused. Even though the responses were posi‐
tive, the star ratings were 1/5. When I dug deeper, I realized that Luma used emojis to
represent numbers in their feedback collection form, but the angry emoji, corre‐
sponding to a one-star rating, was put where the five-star rating should be, as shown
in Figure 10-21.
Be mindful of whether you want users’ feedback to be private or public. For example,
if a user likes something, do you want this information shown to other users? In its
early days, Midjourney’s feedback—someone choosing to upscale an image, generate
variations, or regenerate another batch of images—was public.

488

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

Figure 10-21. Because Luma put the angry emoji, corresponding to a one-star rating,
where a five-star rating should’ve been, some users mistakenly picked it for positive
reviews.
The visibility of a signal can profoundly impact user behavior, user experience, and
the quality of the feedback. Users tend to be more candid in private—there’s a lower
chance of their activities being judged11—which can result in higher-quality signals.
In 2024, X (formerly Twitter) made “likes” private. Elon Musk, the owner of X,
claimed a significant uptick in the number of likes after this change.
However, private signals can reduce discoverability and explainability. For example,
hiding likes prevents users from finding tweets their connections have liked. If X rec‐
ommends tweets based on the likes of the people you follow, hiding likes could result
in users’ confusion about why certain tweets appear in their feeds.

11 See “Ted Cruz Blames Staffer for ‘Liking’ Porn Tweet” (Nelson and Everett, POLITICO, September 2017) and

“Kentucky Senator Whose Twitter Account ‘Liked’ Obscene Tweets Says He Was Hacked” (Liam Niemeyer,
WKU Public Radio, March 2023).

User Feedback

|

489

Feedback Limitations
There’s no doubt of the value of user feedback to an application developer. However,
feedback isn’t a free lunch. It comes with its own limitations.

Biases
Like any other data, user feedback has biases. It’s important to understand these bia‐
ses and design your feedback system around them. Each application has its own bia‐
ses. Here are a few examples of feedback biases to give you an idea of what to look out
for:
Leniency bias
Leniency bias is the tendency for people to rate items more positively than war‐
ranted, often to avoid conflict because they feel compelled to be nice or because
it’s the easiest option. Imagine you’re in a hurry, and an app asks you to rate a
transaction. You aren’t happy with the transaction, but you know that if you rate
it negatively, you’ll be asked to provide reasons, so you just choose positive to be
done with it. This is also why you shouldn’t make people do extra work for your
feedback.
On a five-star rating scale, four and five stars are typically meant to indicate a
good experience. However, in many cases, users may feel pressured to give fivestar ratings, reserving four stars for when something goes wrong. According to
Uber, in 2015, the average driver’s rating was 4.8, with scores below 4.6 putting
drivers at risk of being deactivated.
This bias isn’t necessarily a dealbreaker. Uber’s goal is to differentiate good driv‐
ers from bad drivers. Even with this bias, their rating system seems to help them
achieve this goal. It’s essential to look at the distribution of your user ratings to
detect this bias.
If you want more granular feedback, removing the strong negative connotation
associated with low ratings can help people break out of this bias. For example,
instead of showing users numbers one to five, show users options such as the fol‐
lowing:
• “Great ride. Great driver.”
• “Pretty good.”
• “Nothing to complain about but nothing stellar either.”
• “Could’ve been better.”
• “Don’t match me with this driver again.”12
12 The options suggested here are only to show how options can be rewritten. They haven’t been validated.

490

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

Randomness
Users often provide random feedback, not out of malice, but because they lack
motivation to give more thoughtful input. For example, when two long responses
are shown side by side for comparative evaluation, users might not want to read
both of them and just click on one at random. In the case of Midjourney, users
might also randomly choose one image to generate variations.
Position bias
The position in which an option is presented to users influences how this option
is perceived. Users are generally more likely to click on the first suggestion than
the second. If a user clicks on the first suggestion, this doesn’t necessarily mean
that it’s a good suggestion.
When designing your feedback system, this bias can be mitigated by randomly
varying the positions of your suggestions or by building a model to compute a
suggestion’s true success rate based on its position.
Preference bias
Many other biases can affect a person’s feedback, some of which have been dis‐
cussed in this book. For example, people might prefer the longer response in a
side-by-side comparison, even if the longer response is less accurate—length is
easier to notice than inaccuracies. Another bias is recency bias, where people tend
to favor the answer they see last when comparing two answers.
It’s important to inspect your user feedback to uncover its biases. Understanding
these biases will help you interpret the feedback correctly, avoiding misleading prod‐
uct decisions.

Degenerate feedback loop
Keep in mind that user feedback is incomplete. You only get feedback on what you
show users.
In a system where user feedback is used to modify a model’s behavior, degenerate
feedback loops can arise. A degenerate feedback loop can happen when the predic‐
tions themselves influence the feedback, which, in turn, influences the next iteration
of the model, amplifying initial biases.
Imagine you’re building a system to recommend videos. The videos that rank higher
show up first, so they get more clicks, reinforcing the system’s belief that they’re the
best picks. Initially, the difference between the two videos, A and B, might be minor,
but because A was ranked slightly higher, it got more clicks, and the system kept
boosting it. Over time, A’s ranking soared, leaving B behind. This feedback loop is
why popular videos stay popular, making it tough for new ones to break through.
This issue is known as “exposure bias,” “popularity bias,” or “filter bubbles,” and it’s a
well-studied problem.
User Feedback

|

491

A degenerate feedback loop can alter your product’s focus and use base. Imagine that
initially, a small number of users give feedback that they like cat photos. The system
picks up on this and starts generating more photos with cats. This attracts cat lovers,
who give more feedback that cat photos are good, encouraging the system to generate
even more cats. Before long, your application becomes a cat haven. Here, I use cat
photos as an example, but the same mechanism can amplify other biases, such as rac‐
ism, sexism, and preference for explicit content.
Acting on user feedback can also turn a conversational agent into, for lack of a better
word, a liar. Multiple studies have shown that training a model on user feedback can
teach it to give users what it thinks users want, even if that isn’t what’s most accurate
or beneficial (Stray, 2023). Sharma et al. (2023) show that AI models trained on
human feedback tend toward. sycophancy. They are more likely to present user
responses matching this user’s view.
User feedback is crucial for improving user experience, but if used indiscriminately, it
can perpetuate biases and destroy your product. Before incorporating feedback into
your product, make sure that you understand the limitations of this feedback and its
potential impact.

Summary
If each previous chapter focused on a specific aspect of AI engineering, this chapter
looked into the process of building applications on top of foundation models as a
whole.
The chapter consisted of two parts. The first part discussed a common architecture
for AI applications. While the exact architecture for an application might vary, this
high-level architecture provides a framework for understanding how different com‐
ponents fit together. I used the step-by-step approach in building this architecture to
discuss the challenges at each step and the techniques you can use to address them.
While it’s necessary to separate components to keep your system modular and main‐
tainable, this separation is fluid. There are many ways components can overlap in
functionalities. For example, guardrails can be implemented in the inference service,
the model gateway, or as a standalone component.
Each additional component can potentially make your system more capable, safer, or
faster but will also increase the system’s complexity, exposing it to new failure modes.
One integral part of any complex system is monitoring and observability. Observabil‐
ity involves understanding how your system fails, designing metrics and alerts
around failures, and ensuring that your system is designed in a way that makes these
failures detectable and traceable. While many observability best practices and tools
from software engineering and traditional machine learning are applicable to AI

492

|

Chapter 10: AI Engineering Architecture and User Feedback

engineering applications, foundation models introduce new failure modes, which
require additional metrics and design considerations.
At the same time, the conversational interface enables new types of user feedback,
which you can leverage for analytics, product improvement, and the data flywheel.
The second part of the chapter discussed various forms of conversational feedback
and how to design your application to effectively collect it.
Traditionally, user feedback design has been seen as a product responsibility rather
than an engineering one, and as a result, it is often overlooked by engineers. How‐
ever, since user feedback is a crucial source of data for continuously improving AI
models, more AI engineers are now becoming involved in the process to ensure they
receive the data they need. This reinforces the idea from Chapter 1 that, compared to
traditional ML engineering, AI engineering is moving closer to product. This is
because of both the increasing importance of data flywheel and product experience as
competitive advantages.
Many AI challenges are, at their core, system problems. To solve them, it’s often nec‐
essary to step back and consider the system as a whole. A single problem might be
addressed by different components working independently, or a solution could
require the collaboration of multiple components. A thorough understanding of the
system is essential to solving real problems, unlocking new possibilities, and ensuring
safety.

Summary

|

493

Epilogue

This is some text.
You made it! You just finished a technical book with more than 150,000 words, 160
illustrations, 250 footnotes, and 975 reference links.
Being able to set aside time to learn is a privilege. I’m grateful for the opportunity to
write this book and learn new things. And I’m grateful that you chose to give this
book your valuable learning time.
The hardest part of technical writing isn’t finding the correct answers but asking the
right questions. Writing this book inspired me to ask many questions that guided me
toward fun and useful discoveries. I hope the book sparked some interesting ques‐
tions for you as well.
There are already so many incredible applications built on top of foundation models.
There’s no doubt that this number will grow exponentially in the future. More sys‐
tematic approaches to AI engineering, such as those introduced in this book, will
make the development process easier, enabling even more applications. If there are
any use cases you want to discuss, don’t hesitate to reach out. I love hearing about
interesting problems and solutions. I can be reached via X at @chipro, LinkedIn/in/
chiphuyen, or email at https://huyenchip.com/communication.
For more resources about AI engineering, check out the book’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/chiphuyen/aie-book.
AI engineering has a lot of challenges. Not all of them are fun, but all of them are
opportunities for growth and impact. I can’t wait to learn more about what you’ll
build!

495

Index

A

accelerators, 419-425
computational capabilities, 422
defined, 420-421
memory size and bandwidth, 422-424
power consumption, 424-425
active injection, 243
adapter-based methods, 336
adapters
finetuning, 358
LoRA, 338-347
merging with concatenation, 356
PEFT techniques, 336-338
agents, 275-300
agent failure modes and evaluation, 298-300
efficiency, 300
planning failures, 298
tool failures, 299
overview, 276-278
planning agents, 281-298
foundation models as planners, 284-286
overview, 282-284
plan generation, 286-292
reflection and error correction, 292-294
tool selection, 295-298
tools, 278-281
capability extension, 279
knowledge augmentation, 279
write actions, 280
AI accelerators (see accelerators)
AI application building (see application build‐
ing)
AI application planning (see application plan‐
ning)

AI engineering (AIE)
defined, 12
ML engineering versus, 39-46
rise of AI engineering, 2-14
AI engineering architecture (see engineering
architecture)
AI engineering stack (see engineering stack)
AI judge, 136
(see also AI-as-a-judge)
AI pipeline orchestration (see pipeline orches‐
tration)
AI systems evaluation (see systems evaluation)
AI-as-a-judge, 136-148
limitations, 141-145
biases, 144
criteria ambiguity, 142-144
inconsistency, 142
increased costs and latency, 144
models, 145-148
reasons, 137
reference-based, 147
uses, 138-141
AI-powered data synthesis (see data synthesis,
AI-powered)
AMP (automatic mixed precision), 332
ANN (approximate nearest neighbor), 262
Annoy (approximate nearest neighbors oh
yeah), 263
anomaly detection, 129
Anthropic
contextual retrieval, 271
inverse scaling and alignment training, 71
prompt caching, 444
RAG and, 256

497

APIs (see open source models, model APIs ver‐
sus)
application building, 1-48
application planning, 28-35
maintenance, 34
milestone planning, 33
set expectations, 32
use case evaluation, 29-32
engineering stack, 35-47
AI engineering versus ML engineering,
39-46
application development, 44-46
full-stack engineering versus, 46
three layers of AI stack, 37-39
foundation model use cases, 16-28
coding, 20-22
conversational bots, 26
data organization, 27
education, 24
image and video production, 22
information aggregation, 26
workflow automation, 28
writing, 22-24
rise of AI engineering, 2-14
foundation models to AI engineering,
12-14
application development, 37, 44-46
AI interface, 45
evaluation, 44
prompt engineering and context construc‐
tion, 45
application planning, 28-35
maintenance, 34
milestone planning, 33
set expectations, 32
use case evaluation, 29-32
approximate nearest neighbor (ANN), 262
approximate string matching, 130
ARC-C, 192
attention mechanisms, 60-62
attention modules, 62
MLP modules, 62
optimization, 433-436
attention mechanism redesign, 435
wiring kernels for attention computa‐
tion, 436
redesign, 435
attention modules, 62
augmentation of data

498

| Index

defined, 380
automated attacks, 240
automatic mixed precision (AMP), 332
autoregressive decoding bottleneck, 428-433
inference with reference, 430
parallel decoding, 432
speculative decoding, 428-430
autoregressive language model, 4

B

backpropagation, 320-322
batch inference APIs, 410-412
batch size, 360
batching
batch inference APIs, 410-412
batch size, 360
continuous, 441
dynamic, 441
static, 440
benchmarks
for comparative evaluation, 155
data contamination detection, 124
domain distribution and, 56
domain-specific, 161-163
instruction-following criteria, 173-175
model-centric versus data-centric, 364
navigating public benchmarks, 191-197
biases, 144, 490
bits-per-byte (BPB), 121
bits-per-character (BPC), 121
bottlenecks
autoregressive decoding, 428-433
computational, 407-410
compute-bound, 407
memory, 319-332, 407
scaling, 75-77, 152
BPB (bits-per-byte), 121
BPC (bits-per-character), 121
build time, 266

C

canonical responses, 127
capability extension, 279
chain-of-thought (CoT), 227-229, 365
chaining, 473
change failure rate (CFR), 466
CharacterEval, 176
ChatGPT
comparative evaluation, 149

data privacy issues, 184
effect on AI investment, 13
Gemini versus, 44
hallucinations, 107
and human writing quality, 23
introduction of, xi
and languages other than English, 55
query rewriting, 270
reverse prompt engineering attacks, 237
in schools, 24
Chinchilla scaling law, 72
chunking, 257, 268-269
Claude, RAG and, 256
CLIP, 10, 56, 135
clustering, 129
Common Crawl dataset, 50-55
comparative evaluation, 148-156
comparison data, 85
compilers, 438
components definition, 472
computational bottlenecks, 407-410
computational capabilities, of AI accelerators,
422
compute-bound bottlenecks, 407
compute-optimal models, 72-74
compute-optimal training, 72
concatenation, 356
constrained sampling, 103
context construction, 45, 224, 451
context efficiency, 218-220
context length, 218-220
context parallelism, 447
context precision, 264
context recall, 264
contextual retrieval, 271-272
continuous batching, 441
control flow, 291
conversational bots, 26
conversational feedback
conversation length, 480
conversation organization, 479
extracting, 475-480
language diversity, 480
natural language feedback, 476-479
complaints, 478
early termination, 476
error correction, 477
sentiment, 478
regeneration, 479

copyright regurgitation, 246
copyright, model training and, 185
CoT (chain-of-thought), 227-229
CPU memory (DRAM), 423
criteria ambiguity, 142-144
cross entropy, 120
cross-layer attention, 435

D

data annotation, 377-380
and data curation, 365-380
and data inspection, 398
dataset engineering and, 42
data augmentation, 380-396
defined, 380
data cleaning/filtering, 401
data contamination, 197-200
data coverage, 369-371
data curation, 365-380
data deduplication, 129, 399-400
data flywheels, 377
data formatting, 401-403
data inspection, 397-399
data lineage, 185
data organization, 27
data privacy, 184
data processing, 396-403
data cleaning/filtering, 401
data formatting, 401-403
deduplicating data, 399-400
inspecting data, 397-399
data synthesis, 380-396
AI-powered, 386-395
data verification, 391-393
instruction data synthesis, 388-391
limitations, 393-395
obscure data lineage problems, 395
potential model collapse, 394
quality control problems, 393
reasons for synthesizing data, 381-382
superficial imitation problems, 393
model distillation, 395
traditional techniques, 383-386
rule-based, 383-385
simulation, 385
data verification, 391-393
dataset engineering, 42, 363-404
data augmentation/synthesis, 380-396
data curation, 365-380

Index

|

499

data acquisition/annotation, 377-380
data coverage, 369-371
data quality, 368-369
data quantity, 372-377
data processing, 396-403
data cleaning and filtering, 401
data formatting, 401-403
deduplicating data, 399-400
inspecting data, 397-399
data-centric view of AI, 364
DDR SDRAM (doubled data rate synchronous
dynamic random-access memory), 423
debugging, 226
decoding
autoregressive decoding bottleneck, 428-433
decoupling from prefilling, 442
in transformer architecture, 58
defensive prompt engineering
jailbreaking and prompt injection, 238-243
automated attacks, 240
direct manual prompt hacking, 239-240
indirect prompt injection, 242-243
prompt attack defense, 248-251
model-level defense, 248
prompt-level defense, 249
system-level defense, 250
degenerate feedback loops, 491
demonstration data, 81
dense retrievers, 258
dimensionality reduction, 400
direct manual prompt hacking, 239-240
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), 84
distillation, 312
base, 358
model distillation, 182, 395, 427
synthetic data and, 382
domain-specific capability, 161-163
domain-specific task finetuning, 314
domain-specific training data models, 56-57
dot products, 61
doubled data rate synchronous dynamic
random-access memory (DDR SDRAM),
423
DPO (Direct Preference Optimization), 84
DRAM (CPU memory), 423
drift detection, 471
dynamic batching, 441
dynamic features, 30

500

|

Index

E

edit distance, 130
Elo, 151, 152, 346
embedding, 134-136
embedding algorithm, 133, 135
embedding model, 10
embedding-based retrieval, 260-263
multimodal RAG and, 273
embedding models, 134
engineering architecture, 449-474
AI pipeline orchestration, 472-474
monitoring and observability, 465-472
drift detection, 471
logs and traces, 469-470
metrics, 467-469
monitoring versus observability, 466
step 1: enhancing context, 450
step 2: putting in guardrails, 451-455
guardrail implementation, 455
input guardrails, 451-452
output guardrails, 453-454
step 3: adding model router and gateway,
456-460
gateway, 458-460
router, 456-457
step 4: reducing latency with caches,
460-463
exact caching, 461
semantic caching, 461
step 5: adding agent patterns, 463
engineering stack, 37-39
application development, 37
AI interface, 45
evaluation, 44
prompt engineering and context con‐
struction, 45
infrastructure, 37
ML engineering versus, 40-44
model development, 37
entropy, 119
epochs, 360
error correction, 292-294
evaluation, 44
evaluation harnesses, 191
evaluation methodology, 113-157
AI as a judge, 136-148
AI systems evaluation (see systems evalua‐
tion)
challenges, 152-155

challenges of foundation model evaluation,
114-117
comparative performance to absolute
performance, 154
lack of standardization and quality con‐
trol, 153-154
scalability bottlenecks, 152
exact evaluation, 125-136
future, 155
language model for computing text perplex‐
ity, 125
language modeling metrics, 118-124
rank models with comparative evaluation,
148-156
evaluation pipeline design, 200-208
step 1: creating an evaluation guideline,
202-203
step 2: evaluating all components in a sys‐
tem, 200-201
creating scoring rubrics with examples,
202
defining evaluation criteria, 202
tying evaluation metrics to business met‐
rics, 203
step 3: defining evaluation methods and
data, 204-208
annotating evaluation data, 205-207
evaluating evaluation pipeline, 207
iteration, 208
selecting evaluation methods, 204
evaluation-driven development, 160-161
eviction policies, 461
exact caching, 461
exact evaluation, 125-136
functional correctness, 126-127
similarity measurements against reference
data, 127-133
exact matches, 129
expectation setting, 32
explicit feedback, 475-480

F

factual consistency, 165-169, 202
faithfulness, 164
feature-based transfers, 104, 309
feature-free transfers, 104
federated learning, 348
feedback design
how to collect feedback, 485-489

when to collect feedback
in the beginning, 481
when something bad happens, 481
when the model has low confidence,
483-485
feedforward computation, 447
feedforward layer, 62, 343
few-shot learning, 213-215
finetuning, 307-362
defined, 42
domain-specific tasks, 314
finetuning and RAG, 316-319
hyperparameters, 359-361
batch size, 360
learning rate, 359
number of epochs, 360
prompt loss rate, 361
memory bottlenecks, 319-332
backpropagation and trainable parame‐
ters, 320-322
memory math, 322-324
numerical representations, 325-328
quantization, 328-332
overview, 308-311
structured outputs, 104
tactics, 357-361
techniques, 332-361
LoRA, 338-347
model merging and multi-task finetun‐
ing, 347-357
parameter-efficient finetuning, 332-347
PEFT techniques, 336-338
when to finetune, 311-319
reasons not to finetune, 312-315
reasons to finetune, 311
FLOP (floating point operation), 70
foundation models, 12, 49-112
evaluation challenges, 114-117
comparative performance to absolute
performance, 154
lack of standardization and quality con‐
trol, 153-154
scalability bottlenecks, 152
inverse scaling, 71
modeling, 58-77
model architecture, 58-66
model size, 67-77
parameter versus hyperparameter, 74
post-training, 78-88

Index

|

501

preference finetuning, 83-88
supervised finetuning, 80-83
sampling, 88-111
probabilistic nature of AI, 105-111
sampling fundamentals, 88-90
sampling strategies, 90-95
structured outputs, 99-104
test time compute, 96-99
training data, 50-57
domain-specific models, 56-57
multilingual models, 51-55
use cases, 16-28
coding, 20-22
conversational bots, 26
data organization, 27
education, 24
image and video production, 22
workflow automation, 28
writing, 22-24
full finetuning, 332-347
function calling, 288-290
fuzzy matching, 130

G

gateways, 458-460
Gemini, 44, 99, 444, 483
generation capability, 163-172
global factual consistency, 165
goodput, 414-415
GPU on-chip SRAM, 423
ground truths, 127
grouped-query attention, 436
guardrail implementation, 455
guardrails, 189, 251, 451-455

H

H3 architecture, 66
hallucinations
causes of, 107-111
defined, 105
and finetuning, 317
measurement, 166
metrics for, 467
superficial imitation and, 393
hard attributes, 179
hashing, 400
HellaSwag, 192
hierarchical navigable small world (HNSW),
263

502

|

Index

high-bandwidth memory (HBM), 423
hyperparameters, 74, 359-361

I

IDF (inverse document frequency), 259
IFEval, 174
implicit feedback, 475
in-context learning, 213-215
inconsistency, 106-107, 142
indexing
chunking strategy and, 268-269
defined, 256
with embedding-based retrieval, 261
retrieval systems and, 266
indirect prompt injection, 242-243
inference APIs, 410-412
inference optimization, 43, 405-448
AI accelerators
computational capabilities, 422
defined, 420-421
memory size and bandwidth, 422-424
power consumption, 424-425
case study from PyTorch, 439
inference overview
computational bottlenecks, 407-410
online and batch inference APIs,
410-412
inference performance metrics, 412-419
latency, TTFT, and TPOT, 412-414
throughput/goodput, 414-415
utilization, MFU, and MBU, 416-419
inference service optimization, 440-447
batching, 440
decoupling prefill and decode, 442
parallelism, 444-447
prompt caching, 443-444
KV cache size calculation, 435
memory-bound versus bandwidth-bound
interference, 408
at model/hardware/service levels, 426
model optimization, 426-439
attention mechanism optimization,
433-436
autoregressive decoding bottleneck,
428-433
kernels and compilers, 437-440
model compression, 427
understanding, 406-425
AI accelerators, 419-425

inference overview, 406-412
inference performance metrics, 412-419
inference performance metrics, 412-419
latency, TTFT, and TPOT, 412-414
throughput/goodput, 414-415
utilization, MFU, and MBU, 416-419
inference quantization, 329-331
inference service
defined, 183
and inference optimization, 406
throughput/goodput, 414-415
inference service optimization, 440-447
decoupling prefill and decode, 442
parallelism, 444-447
prompt caching, 443-444
inference with reference, 430
INFOBench, 174
information aggregation, 26
information extraction, 243-247
information retrieval optimization, 267-272
chunking strategy, 268-269
contextual retrieval, 271-272
query rewriting, 270
reranking, 269
instruction data synthesis, 388-391
instruction-following capability, 172-177
instruction-following criteria, 173-175
intent classifiers, 457
inter-token latency (ITL), 413
interface, AI, 45
internal knowledge, 301
inverse document frequency (IDF), 259
inverted file index (IVF), 263
iteration, 208

J

jailbreaking, 238-243
automated attacks, 240
direct manual prompt hacking, 239-240
indirect prompt injection, 242-243
Jamba architecture, 66
judges (see AI judges)

K

k-nearest neighbors (k-NN), 262
kernels, 436, 437-440
key vector (K), 60
key-value (KV) cache, 433-436
key-value vectors, 323

knowledge augmentation, 279
knowledge-augmented verification, 167
KV cache (see key-value cache)

L

LangChain, 232, 250, 303
language modeling metrics, 118-124
bits-per-byte, 121
bits-per-character, 121
cross entropy, 120
entropy, 119
perplexity, 121
perplexity interpretation and use cases,
122-124
language models, 2-6, 125
large language models, 8-12
AI product defensibility, 31
role of AI and humans in the application,
30-31
set expectations, 31
large multimodal model (LMM), 9
latency
AI judges and, 144
inference performance and, 412-414
metrics, 33
reliability versus, 455
layer stacking, 354-355
leaderboards, 152-154, 191-197
learning rate, 359
leniency bias, 490
lexical similarity, 130-131
linear combination summing, 350-352
Llama
attention function, 62
data coverage, 370
data quality, 368
data quantity, 372
data synthesis, 387, 390
finetuning, 310
inference optimization, 439
inference quantization, 330
model distillation, 395
open source models, 182
prefer, 84
preference finetuning, 78
prompt template, 215
scaling law and, 73
LLM-as-a-judge, 136
(see also AI-as-a-judge)

Index

|

503

LMM (large multimodal model), 9
local factual consistency, 165
locality-sensitive hashing (LSH), 263
logit vectors, 89
logprobs, 93, 204
logs, 469-470
long-term memory, 301
loop tiling, 438
LoRA (low-rank adaptation), 338-347
configurations, 341-343
LoRA adapters service, 343-345
mechanism of operation, 340
quantized LoRA (QLoRA), 345-347
low-rank factorization, 340
LSH (locality-sensitive hashing), 263

M

Mamba architecture, 66
manual generation, 383-386
masked language models, 4
Massive Multitask Language Understanding
(MMLU), 34, 192
matches, 150
MBU (model bandwidth utilization), 416-419
MCQs (multiple-choice questions), 163
mean time to detection (MTTD), 466
mean time to response (MTTR), 466
memory, 300-304
internal knowledge, 301
long-term memory, 301
short-term memory, 301
memory bottlenecks, 319-332
bandwidth-bound, 407
memory math, 322-324
memory needed for inference, 323
memory needed for training, 323-324
quantization, 328-332
inference quantization, 329-331
training quantization, 331-332
size and bandwidth, 422-424
memory math, 322-324
metrics, 467-469
correlations between, 208
for AI as a judge, 142-144
for generation capability, 163
for hallucination measurement, 166
inference performance metrics, 412-419
language modeling (see language modeling
metrics)

504

|

Index

observability metrics, 466
reference-based versus reference-free, 127
tying evaluation metrics to business metrics,
203
usefulness thresholds, 33
MFU (model FLOPs utilization), 416-419
milestone planning, 33
mixture-of-experts (MoE) models, 68, 354
ML engineering, AI engineering versus, 39-46
MLP modules, 62
MMLU (Massive Multitask Language Under‐
standing), 34, 192
model APIs, open source models versus (see
open source models, model APIs versus)
model architecture, 58-66
(see also specific architectures, e.g.: trans‐
former architecture)
model bandwidth utilization (MBU), 416-419
model compression, 427
model development, 37, 40-44
dataset engineering, 42
inference optimization, 43-44
modeling and training, 41-42
model distillation, 395
model FLOPs utilization (MFU), 416-419
model inference, 34
model merging, 347-357
concatenation, 356
layer stacking, 354-355
summing, 350-354
model optimization, 426-439
attention mechanism optimization, 433-436
attention mechanism redesign, 435
KV cache size optimization, 436
write kernels for attention computation,
436
autoregressive decoding bottleneck, 428-433
inference with reference, 430
parallel decoding, 432
speculative decoding, 428-430
kernels and compilers, 437-440
model compression, 427
model ranking, 148-156
model router, 456-460
model selection, 179-200
model build versus buy, 181-191
open source models versus model APIs,
183-191

open source, open weight, and model
licenses, 181-183
model selection workflow, 179-181
navigating public benchmarks, 191-197
benchmark selection and aggregation,
191
public leaderboards, 192
model size, 67-77
scaling bottlenecks, 75-77
scaling extrapolation, 74
scaling law: building compute-optimal
models, 72-74
model-centric AI, 364
model-level defense, 248
modeling, 58-77
model architecture, 58-66
model size, 67-77
MoE (mixture-of-experts) models, 354
monitoring, 226, 465-472
MTTD (mean time to detection), 466
MTTR (mean time to response), 466
multi-query attention, 435
multi-task finetuning, 347
multilingual training data models, 51-55
multimodal models, 9
multiple-choice questions (MCQs), 163

N

n-gram similarity, 131
natural language feedback, 476-479
complaints, 478
early termination, 476
error correction, 477
sentiment, 478
natural language generation (NLG), 163-172
natural language processing (NLP), 163-172
needle in a haystack (NIAH) test, 218

O

obscure data lineage, 395
observability, 465-472
on-device deployment, 190
online inference APIs, 410-412
Open CLIP, 56
open source licenses, 181-183
open source models, model APIs versus,
183-191
API cost versus engineering cost, 188
control, access, and transparency, 189

data lineage and copyright, 185
data privacy, 184
functionality, 187
on-device deployment, 190
performance, 186
open weight models, 182
OpenAI
batch APIs, 410
evaluation harnesses, 191
first GPT model, 8
instruction hierarchy for model-level
defense, 248
model as a service, 14
natural language supervision, 10
open source APIs, 183
progression/distillation paths, 357
quality of updated models, 196
test time compute, 97
operator fusion, 438
optimization
inference optimization (see inference opti‐
mization)
of retrieval systems, 267-272

P

pairwise comparison, 400
parallel decoding, 432
parallelism, 444-447
parallelization, 226, 438
parameter-efficient finetuning, 332-347
adapter-based/soft-prompt techniques,
336-338
LoRA, 338-347
configurations, 341-343
how it works, 340
LoRA adapters service, 343-345
quantized LoRA, 345-347
Pareto optimization, 177
partial finetuning, 333
passive phishing, 242
PEFT (see parameter-efficient finetuning)
perplexity, 121-124
perturbation, 385
pipeline orchestration, 472-474
monitoring and observability, 465-472
drift detection, 471
logs and traces, 469-470
metrics, 467-469
planning

Index

|

505

plan generation, 286-292
complex plans, 291
function calling, 288-290
granularity, 290
reflection and error correction, 292-294
pointwise evaluation, 84, 148
position bias, 491
post-processing, 102
post-training, 42, 78-88
preference finetuning, 83-88
supervised finetuning, 80-83
potential model collapse, 394
power consumption, 424-425
PPO (proximal policy optimization), 87
pre-training, 41
precision bits, 326
preference bias, 491
preference finetuning, 83-88, 309
preference models, 147
prefilling, 60
prefilling, decoupling from decoding, 442
proactive features, 30
probabilistic nature of AI, 105-111
hallucination, 107-111
inconsistency, 106-107
probabilistic definition, 105-111
procedural generation, 383-386
product quantization, 263
prompt attacks, 235, 238-243
automated attacks, 240
defense against, 248-251
direct manual prompt hacking, 239-240
indirect prompt injection, 242-243
prompt caching, 443-444
prompt catalogs, 235
prompt engineering, 211-252
basics, 212-220
context length and context efficiency,
218-220
in-context learning: zero-shot and fewshot, 213-215
best practices, 220-235
break complex tasks into simpler sub‐
tasks, 224-227
evaluating prompt engineering tools,
230-233
give the model time to think, 227-229
iterating on your prompts, 229
organize and version prompts, 233-235

506

|

Index

provide sufficient context, 223
write clear and explicit instructions, 220
defensive engineering, 235-251
information extraction, 243-247
jailbreaking and prompt injection,
238-243
prompt attacks defense, 248-251
proprietary prompts and reverse prompt
engineering, 236-238
defined, 45
restricting model knowledge to its context,
224
terminology ambiguity: prompt versus con‐
text, 214
prompt loss rate, 361
prompt optimization, 230
prompt versioning, 233-235
prompt-level defense, 249
proprietary prompts, 236-238
proximal policy optimization (PPO), 87
public leaderboards, 192

Q

QAT (quantization-aware training), 331
QLoRA (quantized LoRA), 345-347
QPS (queries per second), 266
quality control, 393
quantization, 328-332
inference quantization, 329-331
training quantization, 331-332
quantization-aware training (QAT), 331
quantized LoRA (QLoRA), 345-347
queries per second (QPS), 266
query rewriting, 270
query vector (Q), 60

R

RAG (retrieval-augmented generation),
253-275
finetuning and, 316-319
RAG architecture, 256
RAG beyond texts, 273-275
multimodal RAG, 273
RAG with tabular data, 274-275
retrieval algorithms, 257-267
combining, 266
comparing, 264-266
embedding-based retrieval, 260-263
term-based retrieval, 258-260

retrieval optimization, 267-272
chunking strategy, 268-269
contextual retrieval, 271-272
query rewriting, 270
reranking, 269
random feedback, 491
range bits, 326
ranking, 129
rating algorithms, 151
reactive features, 30
recall, 266
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), 58
reference-based judges, 147
reference-based metrics, 127
reference-free metrics, 127
reflection, 292-294
regeneration, 479
reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF), 83-88
relevance, 164
reliability, latency versus, 455
replica parallelism, 445
reranking, 269
restricted weight, 183
retrieval algorithms, 257-267
combining, 266
comparing, 264-266
embedding-based retrieval, 260-263
term-based retrieval, 258-260
retrieval optimization
chunking strategy, 268-269
contextual retrieval, 271-272
query rewriting, 270
reranking, 269
retrieval-augmented generation (see RAG)
retrievers
combining retrieval algorithms, 266
main functions, 256
multimodal RAG and, 273
quality evaluation, 264
sparse versus dense, 258
reverse prompt engineering, 236-238
reward models, 84-87, 147
RLHF (reinforcement learning from human
feedback), 83-88
RNNs (recurrent neural networks), 58
RoleLLM, 176
roleplaying, 175-177
routers, 456-457

rule-based data synthesis, 383-385

S

S4 architecture, 66
safety, 170-172
safety, as evaluation criteria, 170-172
sampling, 88-111
probabilistic nature of AI, 105-111
sampling fundamentals, 88-90
sampling strategies, 90-95
strategies, 90-95
stopping condition, 95
temperature, 90-93
top-k, 94
top-p, 94
structured outputs, 99-104
test time compute, 96-99
scaling bottlenecks, 75-77, 152
scaling extrapolation, 74
scaling law, 72-74
scoring rubrics, 202
self-evaluation, 146
self-supervision language models, 6-8
self-verification, 167
semantic caching, 461
semantic similarity, 132-133
sequence parallelism, 447
sequential finetuning, 348
SFT (supervised finetuning), 78, 80-83, 309
short-term memory, 301
simulation, 385
simultaneous finetuning, 347
SLERP (spherical linear interpolation), 352
slicing, 205
soft attributes, 179
soft prompt-based PEFT methods, 336-338
sparse models, 68, 427
sparse retrievers, 258
speculative decoding, 428-430
spherical linear interpolation (SLERP), 352
SQL queries, 277
static batching, 440
static features, 30
stopping condition, 95
structured data, 123, 303
structured outputs, 99-104
constrained sampling, 103
finetuning, 104
post-processing, 102

Index

|

507

summing, 350-354
linear combination, 350-352
pruning redundant task-specific parame‐
ters, 353
spherical linear interpolation (SLERP), 352
superficial imitation, 393
supervised finetuning (SFT), 78, 80-83, 309
supervision, 6
synthesis of data (see data synthesis)
system components evaluation, 200-201
creating scoring rubrics with examples, 202
defining evaluation criteria, 202
tying evaluation metrics to business metrics,
203
system prompts, 215-217
system-level defense, 250
systems evaluation, 159-209
evaluation criteria, 160-179
cost and latency, 177-179
domain-specific capability, 161-163
evaluation-driven development, 160-161
generation capability, 163-172
instruction-following capability, 172-177
evaluation pipeline design, 200-208
step 1: creating an evaluation guideline,
202-203
step 2: evaluating all components in a
system, 200-201
step 3: defining evaluation methods and
data, 204-208
evaluation-driven development, 160-161
model selection, 179-200
data contamination with public bench‐
marks, 197-200
model build versus buy, 181-191
model selection workflow, 179-181
navigating public benchmarks, 191-197
OpenAI model quality, 196

T

task-based evaluation, 201
temperature, 90-93
term frequency (TF), 259
text-to-SQL, 99, 126, 274
throughput, 414-415
time between tokens (TBT), 413
time per output token (TPOT), 33, 412-414
time to first token (TTFT), 33, 412-414
tokenization, 55, 69, 121, 260, 268

508

|

Index

defined, 3
tokenizer, 268
tokens, 3, 68
tool use, 296
top-k, 94
top-p, 94
TPOT (time per output token), 33, 412-414
traces, 470
trainable parameters, 320-322
training, 41-42
training data, 50-57
domain-specific models, 56-57
multilingual models, 51-55
training quantization, 331-332
transfer learning, 308
transformer architecture, 58-64
attention mechanism, 60-62
attention modules, 62
MLP modules, 62
transformer blocks, 62-64
attention modules, 62
embedding modules, 63
MLP modules, 62
output layers, 63
TruthfulQA, 192
TTFT (time to first token), 33, 412-414
turn-based evaluation, 201

U

unstructured data, 27, 303
use case evaluation, 29-32
usefulness threshold, 33
user feedback, 474-492
extracting conversational feedback, 475-480
natural language feedback, 476-479
other conversational feedback, 479-480
feedback design, 480-489
when to collect feedback, 481
feedback limitations, 490-492
biases, 490
degenerate feedback loops, 491

V

value vector (V), 61
vector database, 261-263
vectorization, 438
vocabulary, 123
defined, 3

W

WinoGrande, 192
workflow automation, 28
write actions, 280

Z

zero-shot learning, 213-215

Index

|

509

About the Author
Chip Huyen is a writer and computer scientist specializing in machine learning (ML)
systems. She has worked at NVIDIA, Snorkel AI, founded an AI infrastructure
startup (later acquired), and taught ML systems at Stanford University.
This book draws on her experience helping major organizations and startups leverage
AI for practical solutions. Her 2022 book, Designing Machine Learning Systems
(O’Reilly), is an Amazon bestseller in AI and has been translated into over 10
languages.
She is also the author of four bestselling Vietnamese books, including the series Xach
ba lo len va Di (Pack Your Bag and Go).

Colophon
The animal on the cover of AI Engineering is an Omani owl (Strix butleri), a so-called
“earless owl” native to Oman, Iran, and the UAE.
An owl collected in 1878 was dubbed Strix butleri after its discoverer, ornithologist
Colonel Edward Arthur Butler. This bird was commonly known as Hume’s owl and
it was thought to be widespread throughout the Middle East.
In 2013, a previously unknown species of owl was discovered in Oman and given the
name Strix omanensis, the Omani owl. No physical specimen was collected, but the
owl was described from photographs and sound recordings. Then, in 2015, an analy‐
sis of the Strix butleri holotype (the original specimen found in 1878) revealed that
the owl was actually the same as Strix omanensis, and distinct from the more com‐
mon owl found throughout the Middle East. Following naming conventions, the spe‐
cies kept the original name Strix butleri and the more common owl was given the
name Strix hadorami, the desert owl.
The Omani owl has a pale and dark gray face and orange eyes. Its upperparts are a
dark grayish brown and its underparts are pale gray with narrow dark streaks. It’s a
medium-sized owl with a round head and no ear tufts. As a relatively new discovery,
ornithologists are still researching the owl’s behavior, ecology, and distribution.
The IUCN conservation status of the Omani owl is data deficient. Many of the ani‐
mals on O’Reilly covers are endangered; all of them are important to the world.
The cover illustration is by Karen Montgomery, based on an antique line engraving
from Lydekker’s Royal Natural History. The series design is by Edie Freedman, Ellie
Volckhausen, and Karen Montgomery. The cover fonts are Gilroy Semibold and
Guardian Sans. The text font is Adobe Minion Pro; the heading font is Adobe Myriad
Condensed; and the code font is Dalton Maag’s Ubuntu Mono.

Learn from experts.
Become one yourself.
60,000+ titles | Live events with experts | Role-based courses
Interactive learning | Certification preparation

Try the O’Reilly learning platform free for 10 days.

©2025 O’Reilly Media, Inc. O’Reilly is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. 718900_7x9.1875

